
<p>They stood together at the parapet,
their arms about each other's
waists, her head against his cheek.
Behind, the broad leaved shrubbery
gossiped softly with the wind, and
from the lower main terrace came
music and laughing voices. The
city of Wardshaven spread in front
of them, white buildings rising from
the wide spaces of green treetops,
under a shimmer of sun-reflecting
aircars above. Far away, the mountains
were violet in the afternoon
haze, and the huge red sun hung in
a sky as yellow as a ripe peach.</p>

<p>His eye caught a twinkle ten
miles to the southwest, and for
an instant he was puzzled. Then he
frowned. The sunlight on the two
thousand-foot globe of Duke Angus'
new ship, the <i>Enterprise</i>, back
at the Gorram shipyards after her
final trial cruise. He didn't want to
think about that, now.</p>

<p>Instead, he pressed the girl closer
and whispered her name, "Elaine,"
and then, caressing every syllable,
"Lady Elaine Trask of Traskon."</p>

<p>"Oh, no, Lucas!" Her protest
was half joking and half apprehensive.
"It's bad luck to be called by
your married name before the
wedding."</p>

<p>"I've been calling you that in my
mind since the night of the Duke's
ball, when you were just home from
school on Excalibur."</p>

<p>She looked up from the corner
of her eye.</p>

<p>"That was when I started calling
me that, too," she confessed.</p>

<p>"There's a terrace to the west at
Traskon New House," he told her.
"Tomorrow, we'll have our dinner
there, and watch the sunset together."</p>

<p>"I know. I thought that was to
be our sunset-watching place."</p>

<p>"You have been peeking," he
accused. "Traskon New House was
to be your surprise."</p>

<p>"I always was a present-peeker,
New Year's and my birthdays. But
I only saw it from the air. I'll be
very surprised at everything inside,"
she promised. "And very
delighted."</p>

<p>And when she'd seen everything
and Traskon New House wasn't
a surprise any more, they'd take
a long space trip. He hadn't mentioned
that to her, yet. To some of
the other Sword-Worlds&mdash;Excalibur,
of course, and Morglay and Flamberge
and Durendal. No, not Durendal;
the war had started there
again. But they'd have so much
fun. And she would see clear blue
skies again, and stars at night. The
cloud-veil hid the stars from Gram,
and Elaine had missed them, since
coming home from Excalibur.</p>

<p>The shadow of an aircar fell
briefly upon them and they looked
up and turned their heads, in time
to see it sink with graceful dignity
toward the landing-stage of Karval
House, and he glimpsed its blazonry&mdash;sword
and atom-symbol, the
badge of the ducal house of Ward.
He wondered if it were Duke Angus
himself, or just some of his people
come ahead of him. They should
get back to their guests, he supposed.
Then he took her in his arms
and kissed her, and she responded
ardently. It must have been all of
five minutes since they'd done that
before.</p>

<hr/>

<p>A slight cough behind them
brought them apart and their heads
around. It was Sesar Karvall, gray-haired
and portly, the breast of his
blue coat gleaming with orders and
decorations and the sapphire in the
pommel of his dress-dagger twinkling.</p>

<p>"I thought I'd find you two
here," Elaine's father smiled.
"You'll have tomorrow and tomorrow
and tomorrow together,
but need I remind you that today
we have guests, and more coming
every minute."</p>

<p>"Who came in the Ward car?"
Elaine asked.</p>

<p>"Rovard Grauffis. And Otto
Harkaman; you never met him, did
you, Lucas?"</p>

<p>"No; not by introduction. I'd
like to, before he spaces out." He
had nothing against Harkaman
personally; only against what he
represented. "Is the Duke coming?"</p>

<p>"Oh, surely. Lionel of Newhaven
and the Lord of Northport
are coming with him. They're at
the Palace now." Karvall hesitated.
"His nephew's back in town."</p>

<p>Elaine was distressed; she started
to say: "Oh, dear! I hope he
doesn't&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Has Dunnan been bothering
Elaine again?"</p>

<p>"Nothing to take notice of. He
was here, yesterday, demanding to
speak with her. We got him to
leave without too much unpleasantness."</p>

<p>"It'll be something for me to
take notice of, if he keeps it up
after tomorrow."</p>

<p>For his seconds and Andray Dunnan's,
that was; he hoped it
wouldn't come to that. He didn't
want to have to shoot a kinsman
to the house of Ward, and a crazy
man to boot.</p>

<p>"I'm terribly sorry for him,"
Elaine was saying. "Father, you
should have let me talk to him.
I might have made him understand."</p>

<p>Sesar Karvall was shocked.
"Child, you couldn't have subjected
yourself to that! The man is
insane!" Then he saw her bare
shoulders, and was even more
shocked. "Elaine, your shawl!"</p>

<p>Her hands went up and couldn't
find it; she looked about in confused
embarrassment. Amused, Lucas
picked it from the shrub onto
which she had tossed it and draped
it over her shoulders, his hands
lingering briefly. Then he gestured
to the older man to precede them,
and they entered the arbored walk.
At the other end, in an open circle,
a fountain played; white marble
girls and boys bathing in the jade-green
basin. Another piece of loot
from one of the Old Federation
planets; that was something he'd
tried to avoid in furnishing Traskon
New House. There'd be a lot of that
coming to Gram, after Otto Harkaman
took the <i>Enterprise</i> to space.</p>

<p>"I'll have to come back, some
time, and visit them," Elaine whispered
to him. "They'll miss me."</p>

<p>"You'll find a lot of new friends
at your new home," he whispered
back. "You wait till tomorrow."</p>

<p>"I'm going to put a word in the
Duke's ear about that fellow,"
Sesar Karvall, still thinking of
Dunnan, was saying. "If he speaks
to him, maybe it'll do some good."</p>

<p>"I doubt it. I don't think Duke
Angus has any influence over him
at all."</p>

<p>Dunnan's mother had been the
Duke's younger sister; from his
father he had inherited what had
originally been a prosperous barony.
Now it was mortgaged to the
top of the manor-house aerial-mast.
The Duke had once assumed Dunnan's
debts, and refused to do so
again. Dunnan had gone to space
a few times, as a junior officer on
trade-and-raid voyages into the Old
Federation. He was supposed to be
a fair astrogator. He had expected
his uncle to give him command of
the <i>Enterprise</i>, which had been
ridiculous. Disappointed in that,
he had recruited a mercenary company
and was seeking military
employment: It was suspected that
he was in correspondence with his
uncle's worst enemy, Duke Omfray
of Glaspyth.</p>

<p>And he was obsessively in love
with Elaine Karvall, a passion
which seemed to nourish itself on
its own hopelessness. Maybe it
would be a good idea to take that
space trip right away. There ought
to be a ship leaving Bigglersport
for one of the other Sword-Worlds,
before long.</p>

<hr/>

<p>They paused at the head of the
escalators; the garden below was
thronged with guests, the bright
shawls of the ladies and the coats
of the men making shifting color-patterns
among the flower-beds and
on the lawns and under the trees.
Serving-robots, flame-yellow and
black in the Karvall colors, floated
about playing soft music and offering
refreshments. There was a continuous
spiral of changing costume-color
around the circular robo-table.
Voices babbled happily like
a mountain river.</p>

<p>As they stood looking down,
another aircar circled low; green
and gold, lettered PANPLANET
NEWS SERVICE. Sesar Karvall
swore in irritation.</p>

<p>"Didn't there use to be something
they called privacy?" he
asked.</p>

<p>"It's a big story, Sesar."</p>

<p>It was; more than the marriage
of two people who happened to be
in love with each other. It was the
marriage of the farming and ranching
barony of Traskon and the
Karvall steel mills. More, it was
public announcement that the
wealth and fighting-men of both
baronies were now aligned behind
Duke Angus of Wardshaven. So it
was a general holiday. Every industry
had closed down at noon today,
and would be closed until morning-after-next,
and there would be
dancing in every park and feasting
in every tavern. To Sword-Worlders,
any excuse for a holiday was
better than none.</p>

<p>"They're our people, Sesar; they
have a right to have a good time
with us. I know everybody at
Traskon is watching this by
screen."</p>

<p>He raised his hand and waved
to the news car, and when it swung
its pickup around, he waved again.
Then they went down the long
escalator.</p>

<p>Lady Lavina Karvall was the
center of a cluster of matrons and
dowagers, around which tomorrow's
bridesmaids fluttered like
many-colored butterflies. She took
possession of her daughter and
dragged her into the feminine
circle. He saw Rovard Grauffis,
small and saturnine, Duke Angus'
henchman, and Burt Sandrasan,
Lady Lavina's brother. They spoke,
and then an upper-servant, his
tabard blazoned with the yellow
flame and black hammer of Karvall
mills, approached his master with
some tale of domestic crisis, and
the two went away together.</p>

<p>"You haven't met Captain Harkaman,
Lucas," Rovard Grauffis
said. "I wish you'd come over and
say hello and have a drink with
him. I know your attitude, but he's
a good sort. Personally, I wish we
had a few like him around here."</p>

<p>That was his main objection.
There were fewer and fewer men
of that sort on any of the Sword-Worlds.</p>




<!--se:split--><h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">II</h2>


<p>A dozen men clustered around the
bartending robot&mdash;his cousin and
family lawyer, Nikkolay Trask;
Lothar Ffayle, the banker; Alex
Gorram, the shipbuilder, and his
son Basil; Baron Rathmore; more
of the Wardshaven nobles whom he
knew only distantly. And Otto
Harkaman.</p>

<p>Harkaman was a Space Viking.
That would have set him apart,
even if he hadn't topped the tallest
of them by a head. He wore a short
black jacket, heavily gold-braided,
and black trousers inside ankle-boots;
the dagger on his belt was
no mere dress-ornament. His
tousled red-brown hair was long
enough to furnish extra padding
in a combat-helmet, and his beard
was cut square at the bottom.</p>

<p>He had been fighting on Durendal,
for one of the branches of the
royal house contesting fratricidally
for the throne. The wrong one; he
had lost his ship, and most of his
men and, almost, his own life. He
had been a penniless refugee on
Flamberge, owning only the clothes
he stood in and his personal
weapons and the loyalty of half a
dozen adventurers as penniless as
himself, when Duke Angus had
invited him to Gram to command
the <i>Enterprise</i>.</p>

<p>"A pleasure, Lord Trask. I've
met your lovely bride-to-be, and
now that I meet you, let me congratulate
both." Then, as they were
having a drink together, he put
his foot in it by asking: "You're
not an investor in the Tanith
Adventure, are you?"</p>

<p>He said he wasn't, and would
have let it go at that. Young Basil
Gorram had to get his foot in,
too.</p>

<p>"Lord Trask does not approve of
the Tanith Adventure," he said
scornfully. "He thinks we should
stay home and produce wealth,
instead of exporting robbery and
murder to the Old Federation for
it."</p>

<p>The smile remained on Otto
Harkaman's face; only the friendliness
was gone. He unobtrusively
shifted his drink to his left hand.</p>

<p>"Well, our operations are definable
as robbery and murder," he
agreed. "Space Vikings are professional
robbers and murderers. And
you object? Perhaps you find me
personally objectionable?"</p>

<p>"I wouldn't have shaken your
hand or had a drink with you if
I did. I don't care how many
planets you raid or cities you sack,
or how many innocents, if that's
what they are, you massacre in the
Old Federation. You couldn't possibly
do anything worse than those
people have been doing to one
another for the past ten centuries.
What I object to is the way you're
raiding the Sword-Worlds."</p>

<p>"You're crazy!" Basil Gorram
exploded.</p>

<p>"Young man," Harkaman reproved,
"the conversation was
between Lord Trask and myself.
And when somebody makes a statement
you don't understand, don't
tell him he's crazy. Ask him what
he means. What <i>do</i> you mean,
Lord Trask?"</p>

<p>"You should know; you've just
raided Gram for eight hundred
of our best men. You raided me for
close to forty vaqueros, farm-workers,
lumbermen, machine-operators,
and I doubt I'll be able to replace
them with as good." He turned to
the elder Gorram. "Alex, how
many have you lost to Captain
Harkaman?"</p>

<p>Gorram tried to make it a dozen;
pressed, he admitted to a score and
a half. Roboticians, machine-supervisors,
programmers, a couple of
engineers, a foreman. There was
grudging agreement from the
others. Burt Sandrasan's engine-works
had lost almost as many, of
the same kind. Even Lothar Ffayle
admitted to losing a computerman
and a guard-sergeant.</p>

<p>And after they were gone, the
farms and ranches and factories
would go on, almost but not quite
as before. Nothing on Gram, nothing
on any of the Sword-Worlds, was
done as efficiently as three centuries
ago The whole level of Sword-World
life was sinking, like the
east coastline of this continent, so
slowly as to be evident only from
the records and monuments of the
past. He said as much, and added:</p>

<p>"And the genetic loss. The best
Sword-World genes are literally
escaping to space, like the atmosphere
of a low-gravity planet, each
generation begotten by fathers
slightly inferior to the last. It
wasn't so bad when the Space
Vikings raided directly from the
Sword-Worlds; they got home once
in a while. Now they're conquering
planets in the Old Federation for
bases, and staying there."</p>

<hr/>

<p>Everybody had begun to relax;
this wouldn't be a quarrel. Harkaman,
who had shifted his drink
back to his right hand, chuckled.</p>

<p>"That's right. I've fathered my
share of brats in the Old Federation,
and I know Space Vikings
whose fathers were born on Old
Federation planets." He turned to
Basil Gorram. "You see, the gentleman
isn't crazy, at all. That's what
happened to the Terran Federation,
by the way. The good men all left
to colonize, and the stuffed shirts
and yes-men and herd-followers
and safety-firsters stayed on Terra
and tried to govern the galaxy."</p>

<p>"Well, maybe this is all new to
you, captain," Rovard Grauffis
said sourly, "but Lucas Trask's
dirge for the Decline and Fall of
the Sword-Worlds is an old song
to the rest of us. I have too much
to do to stay here and argue."</p>

<p>Lothar Ffayle evidently did intend
to stay and argue.</p>

<p>"All you're saying, Lucas, is
that we're expanding. You want
us to sit here and build up population
pressure like Terra in the First
Century?"</p>

<p>"With three and a half billion
people spread out on twelve
planets? They had that many on
Terra alone. And it took us eight
centuries to reach that."</p>

<p>That had been since the Ninth
Century, Atomic Era, at the end
of the Big War. Ten thousand men
and women on Abigor, refusing to
surrender, had taken the remnant
of the System States Alliance navy
to space, seeking a world the Federation
had never heard of and
wouldn't find for a long time. That
had been the world they had called
Excalibur. From it, their grandchildren
had colonized Joyeuse and
Durendal and Flamberge; Haulteclere
had been colonized in the next
generation from Joyeuse, and Gram
from Haulteclere.</p>

<p>"We're not expanding, Lothar;
we're contracting. We stopped expanding
three hundred and fifty
years ago, when that ship came
back to Morglay from the Old
Federation and reported what had
been happening out there since the
Big War. Before that, we were
discovering new planets and colonizing
them. Since then, we've
been picking the bones of the dead
Terran Federation."</p>


<p>Something was going on by the
escalators to the landing stage.
People were moving excitedly in
that direction, and the news cars
were circling like vultures over a
sick cow. Harkaman wondered,
hopefully, if it mightn't be a fight.</p>

<p>"Some drunk being bounced."

Nikkolay, Lucas' cousin, commented.
"Sesar's let all Wardshaven
in here, today. But, Lucas,
this Tanith adventure; we're not
making any hit-and-run raid. We're
taking over a whole planet; it'll
be another Sword-World in forty
or fifty years."</p>

<p>"Inside another century, we'll
conquer the whole Federation,"
Baron Rathmore declared. He was
a politician and never let exaggeration
worry him.</p>

<p>"What I don't understand,"
Harkaman said, "is why you support
Duke Angus, Lord Trask, if

you think the Tanith adventure is
doing Gram so much harm."</p>

<p>"If Angus didn't do it, somebody
else would. But Angus is going to
make himself King of Gram, and
I don't think anybody else could
do that. This planet needs a single
sovereignty. I don't know how
much you've seen of it outside this
duchy, but don't take Wardshaven
as typical. Some of these duchies,
like Glaspyth or Didreksburg, are
literal snake pits. All the major
barons are at each other's throats,
and they can't even keep their own
knights and petty-barons in order.</p>

<p>Why, there's a miserable little war
down in Southmain Continent
that's been going on for over two
centuries."</p>

<p>"That's probably where Dunnan's
going to take that army of
his," a robot-manufacturing baron
said. "I hope it gets wiped out,
and Dunnan with it."</p>

<p>"You don't have to go to Southmain;
just go to Glaspyth," somebody
else said.</p>

<p>"Well, if we don't get a planetary
monarchy to keep order, this planet
will decivilize like anything in the
Old Federation."</p>

<p>"Oh, <i>come</i>, Lucas!" Alex Gorram
protested. "That's pulling it out
too far."</p>

<p>"Yes, for one thing, we don't
have the Neobarbarians," somebody
said. "And if they ever came
out here, we'd blow them to Em-See-Square
in nothing flat. Might
be a good thing if they did, too; it
would stop us squabbling among
ourselves."</p>

<p>Harkaman looked at him in
surprise. "Just who do you think
the Neobarbarians are, anyhow?"
he asked. "Some race of invading
nomads; Attila's Huns in spaceships?"</p>

<p>"Well, isn't that who they are?"
Gorram asked.</p>

<p>"Nifflheim, no! There aren't a
dozen and a half planets in the
Old Federation that still have
hyperdrive, and they're all civilized.
That's if 'civilized' is what
Gilgamesh is," he added. "These
are homemade barbarians. Workers
and peasants who revolted to seize
and divide the wealth and then
found they'd smashed the means of
production and killed off all the
technical brains. Survivors on planets
hit during the Interstellar Wars,
from the Eleventh to the Thirteenth
Centuries, who lost the machinery
of civilization. Followers of political
leaders on local-dictatorship
planets. Companies of mercenaries
thrown out of employment and
living by pillage. Religious
fanatics following self-anointed
prophets."</p>

<p>"You think we don't have plenty
of Neobarbarian material here on
Gram?" Trask demanded. "If you
do, take a look around."</p>

<p>Glaspyth, somebody said.</p>

<p>"That collection of over-ripe
gallows-fruit Andray Dunnan's recruited,"
Rathmore mentioned.</p>

<p>Alex Gorram was grumbling that
his shipyard was full of them;
agitators stirring up trouble, trying
to organize a strike to get rid of
the robots.</p>

<p>"Yes," Harkaman pounced on
that last. "I know of at least forty
instances, on a dozen and a half
planets, in the last eight centuries,
of anti-technological movements.
They had them on Terra, back as
far as the Second Century Pre-Atomic.
And after Venus seceded
from the First Federation, before
the Second Federation was organized."</p>

<p>"You're interested in history?"
Rathmore asked.</p>

<p>"A hobby. All spacemen have
hobbies. There's very little work
aboard ship in hyperspace; boredom
is the worst enemy. My guns-and-missiles
officer, Vann Larch, is a
painter. Most of his work was lost
with the <i>Corisande</i> on Durendal, but
he kept us from starving a few
times on Flamberge by painting
pictures and selling them. My
hyperspatial astrogator, Guatt Kirbey,
composes music; he tries to
express the mathematics of hyperspatial
theory in musical terms. I
don't care much for it, myself," he
admitted. "I study history. You
know, it's odd; practically everything
that's happened on any of
the inhabited planets happened on
Terra before the first spaceship."</p>

<p>The garden immediately around
them was quiet, now; everybody
was over by the landing-stage
escalators. Harkaman would have
said more, but at that moment he
saw half a dozen of Sesar Karvall's
uniformed guardsmen run past.
They were helmeted and in bullet-proofs;
one of them had an auto-rifle,
and the rest carried knobbed
plastic truncheons. The Space Viking
set down his drink.</p>

<p>"Let's go," he said. "Our host
is calling up his troops; I think the
guests ought to find battle-stations,
too."</p>




<!--se:split--><h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">III</h2>


<p>The gaily-dressed crowd formed
a semicircle facing the landing-stage
escalators; everybody was
staring in embarrassed curiosity,
those behind craning over the
shoulders of those in front. The
ladies had drawn up their shawls
in frigid formality; many had even
covered their heads. There were
four news-service cars hovering
above; whatever was going on
was getting a planetwide screen
showing. The Karvall guardsmen
were trying to get through; their
sergeant was saying, over and over,
"Please, ladies and gentlemen; your
pardon, noble sir," and getting
nowhere.</p>

<p>Otto Harkaman swore disgustedly
and shoved the sergeant aside.
"Make way, here!" he bellowed.
"Let these guards pass." With that,
he almost hurled a gaily-dressed
gentleman aside on either hand;
they both turned to glare angrily,
then got hastily out of his way.
Meditating briefly on the uses of
bad manners in an emergency,
Trask followed, with the others;
the big Space Viking plowed to
the front, where Sesar Karvall and
Rovard Grauffis and several others
were standing.</p>

<p>Facing them, four men in black
cloaks stood with their backs to
the escalators. Two were commonfolk
retainers; hired gunmen, to
be precise. They were at pains to
keep their hands plainly in sight,
and seemed to be wishing themselves
elsewhere. The man in front
wore a diamond sunburst jewel on
his beret, and his cloak was lined
with pale blue silk. His thin,
pointed face was deeply lined about
the mouth and penciled with a thin
black mustache. His eyes showed
white all around the irises, and now
and then his mouth would twitch
in an involuntary grimace. Andray
Dunnan; Trask wondered briefly
how soon he would have to look
at him from twenty-five meters over
the sights of a pistol. The face of
the slightly taller man who stood
at his shoulder was paper-white,
expressionless, with a black beard.
His name was Nevil Ormm, nobody
was quite sure whence he had
come, and he was Dunnan's henchman
and constant companion.</p>

<p>"You lie!" Dunnan was shouting.
"You lie damnably, in your
stinking teeth, all of you! You've
intercepted every message she's
tried to send me."</p>

<p>"My daughter has sent you no
messages, Lord Dunnan," Sesar
Karvall said, with forced patience.
"None but the one I just gave you,
that she wants nothing whatever
to do with you."</p>

<p>"You think I believe that? You're
holding her a prisoner; Satan only
knows how you've been torturing
her to force her into this abominable
marriage&mdash;"</p>

<p>There was a stir among the bystanders;
that was more than well-mannered
restraint could stand. Out
of the murmur of incredulous
voices, one woman's was quite
audible:</p>

<p>"Well, really! He actually <i>is</i>
crazy!"</p>

<p>Dunnan, like everybody else,
heard it. "Crazy, am I?" he blazed.
"Because I can see through this
hypocritical sham? Here's Lucas
Trask, he wants an interest in
Karvall mills, and here's Sesar
Karvall, he wants access to iron
deposits on Traskon land. And my
loving uncle, he wants the help of
both of them in stealing Omfray
of Glaspyth's duchy. And here's
this loan-shark of a Ffayle, trying
to claw my lands away from me,
and Rovard Grauffis, the fetchdog
of my uncle who won't lift a finger
to save his kinsman from ruin, and
this foreigner Harkaman who's
swindled me out of command of
the <i>Enterprise</i>. You're all plotting
against me&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Sir Nevil," Grauffis said, "you
can see that Lord Dunnan's not
himself. If you're a good friend to
him, you'll get him out of here
before Duke Angus arrives."</p>

<p>Ormm leaned forward and spoke
urgently in Dunnan's ear. Dunnan
pushed him angrily away.</p>

<p>"Great Satan, are you against
me, too?" he demanded.</p>

<p>Ormm caught his arm. "You
fool, do you want to ruin everything,
now&mdash;" He lowered his
voice; the rest was inaudible.</p>

<p>"No, curse you, I won't go till
I've spoken to her, face to face&mdash;"</p>

<p>There was another stir among the
spectators; the crowd was parting,
and Elaine was coming through,
followed by her mother and Lady
Sandrasan and five or six other
matrons. They all had their shawls
over their heads, right ends over
left shoulders; they all stopped
except Elaine, who took a few
steps forward and confronted Andray
Dunnan. He had never seen
her look more beautiful, but it was
the icy beauty of a honed dagger.</p>

<p>"Lord Dunnan, what do you
wish to say to me?" she asked.
"Say it quickly and then go; you
are not welcome here."</p>

<p>"Elaine!" Dunnan cried, taking
a step forward. "Why do you cover
your head; why do you speak to me
as a stranger? I am Andray, who
loves you. Why are you letting
them force you into this wicked
marriage?"</p>

<p>"No one is forcing me; I am marrying
Lord Trask willingly and
happily, because I love him. Now,
please, go and make no more
trouble at my wedding."</p>

<p>"That's a lie! They're making
you say that! You don't have to
marry him; they can't make you.
Come with me now. They won't
dare stop you. I'll take you away
from all these cruel, greedy people.
You love me, you've always loved
me. You've told me you loved me,
again and again&mdash;"</p>

<p>Yes, in his own private dream-world,
a world of fantasy that had
now become Andray Dunnan's reality,
in which an Elaine Karvall
whom his imagination had created
existed only to love him. Confronted
by the real Elaine, he simply
rejected the reality.</p>

<p>"I never loved you, Lord Dunnan,
and I never told you so. I
never hated you, either, but you
are making it very hard for me
not to. Now go, and never let me
see you again."</p>

<p>With that, she turned and started
back through the crowd, which
parted in front of her. Her mother
and her aunt and the other ladies
followed.</p>

<p>"You lied to me!" Dunnan
shrieked after her. "You lied all
the time. You're as bad as the rest
of them, all scheming and plotting
against me, betraying me. I know
what it's about; you all want to
cheat me of my rights, and keep my
usurping uncle on the ducal throne.
And you, you false-hearted harlot,
you're the worst of them all!"</p>

<p>Sir Nevil Ormm caught his shoulder
and spun him around, propelling
him toward the escalators.
Dunnan struggled, screaming inarticulately
like a wounded wolf.
Ormm was cursing furiously.</p>

<p>"You two!" he shouted. "Help
me, here. Get hold of him."</p>

<p>Dunnan was still howling as they
forced him onto the escalator, the
backs of the two retainers' cloaks,
badged with the Dunnan crescent,
light blue on black, hiding him.
After a little, an aircar with the
blue crescent blazonry lifted and
sped away.</p>

<p>"Lucas, he's crazy," Sesar Karvall
was insisting. "Elaine hasn't
spoken fifty words to him since he
came back from his last voyage&mdash;"</p>

<p>He laughed and put a hand on
Karvall's shoulder. "I know that,
Sesar. You don't think, do you,
that I need assurance of it?"</p>

<p>"Crazy, I'll say he's crazy,"

Rovard Grauffis put in. "Did you
hear what he said about his rights?
Wait till his Grace hears about
that."</p>

<p>"Does he lay claim to the ducal
throne, Sir Rovard?" Otto Harkaman
asked, sharply and seriously.</p>

<p>"Oh, he claims that his mother
was born a year and a half before
Duke Angus and the true date of
her birth falsified to give Angus
the succession. Why, his present
Grace was three years old when she
was born. I was old Duke Fergus'
esquire; I carried Angus on my
shoulder when Andray Dunnan's
mother was presented to the lords
and barons the day after she was
born."</p>

<p>"Of course he's crazy," Alex Gorram
agreed. "I don't know why the
Duke doesn't have him put under
psychiatric treatment."</p>

<p>"I'd put him under treatment,"
Harkaman said, drawing a finger
across under his beard. "Crazy men
who pretend to thrones are bombs
that ought to be deactivated, before
they blow things up."</p>

<p>"We couldn't do that," Grauffis
said. "After all, he's Duke Angus'
nephew&mdash;"</p>

<p>"I could do it," Harkaman said.
"He only has three hundred men
in this company of his. Why you
people ever let him recruit them
Satan only knows," he parenthesized.
"I have eight hundred;
five hundred ground-fighters. I'd
like to see how they shape up in
combat, before we space out. I can
have them ready for action in two
hours, and it'd be all over before
midnight."</p>

<p>"No, Captain Harkaman; his
Grace would never permit it,"
Grauffis vetoed. "You have no
idea of the political harm that
would do among the independent
lords on whom we're counting for
support. You weren't here on Gram
when Duke Ridgerd of Didreksburg
had his sister Sancia's second husband
poisoned&mdash;"</p>




<!--se:split--><h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">IV</h2>


<p>They halted under the colonnade;
beyond, the lower main terrace
was crowded, and a medley of old
love songs was wafting from the
sound outlets, for the sixth or
eighth time around. He looked at
his watch; it was ninety seconds
later than the last time he had
done so. Give it fifteen more minutes
to get started, and another
fifteen to get away after the marriage
toasts and the felicitations.
And no marriage, however pompous,
lasted more than half an hour.
An hour, then, till he and Elaine
would be in the aircar, bulleting
toward Traskon.</p>

<p>The love songs stopped abruptly;
after a momentary silence, a trumpet,
considerably amplified, blared;
the "Ducal Salute." The crowd
stopped shifting, the buzz of voices
ceased. At the head of the landing-stage
escalators there was a glow of
color and the ducal party began
moving down. A platoon of guards
in red and yellow, with gilded
helmets and tasseled halberds. An
esquire bearing the Sword of State.
Duke Angus, with his council, Otto
Harkaman among them; the Duchess
Flavia and her companion-ladies.
The household gentlemen,
and their ladies. More guardsmen.
There was a great burst of cheering;
the news-service aircars got into
position above the procession. Cousin
Nikkolay and a few others
stepped out from between the
pillars into the sunlight; there was
a similar movement at the other
side of the terrace. The ducal party
reached the end of the central
walkway, halted and deployed.</p>

<p>"All right; let's shove off,"
Cousin Nikkolay said, stepping
forward.</p>

<p>Ten minutes since they had come
outside; another five to get into
position. Fifty minutes, now, till
he and Elaine&mdash;Lady Elaine Trask
of Traskon, for real and for always&mdash;would
be going home.</p>

<p>"Sure the car's ready?" he asked,
for the hundredth time.</p>

<p>His cousin assured him that it
was. Figures in Karvall black and
flame-yellow appeared across the
terrace. The music began again, this
time the stately "Nobles' Wedding
March," arrogant and at the same
time tender. Sesar Karvall's gentleman-secretary,
and the Karvall lawyer;
executives of the steel mills,
the Karvall guard-captain. Sesar
himself, with Elaine on his arm;
she was wearing a shawl of black
and yellow. He looked around in
sudden fright; "For the love of
Satan, where's our shawl?" he
demanded, and then relaxed when
one of his gentlemen exhibited it,
green and tawny in Traskon colors.
The bridesmaids, led by Lady
Lavina Karvall. Finally they
halted, ten yards apart, in front of
the Duke.</p>

<hr/>

<p>"Who approaches us?" Duke
Angus asked of his guard-captain.</p>

<p>He had a thin, pointed face, almost
femininely sensitive, and a
small pointed beard. He was bareheaded
except for the narrow golden
circlet which he spent most of
his waking time scheming to convert
into a royal crown. The guard-captain
repeated the question.</p>

<p>"I am Sir Nikkolay Trask; I
bring my cousin and liege-lord,
Lucas, Lord Trask, Baron of
Traskon. He comes to receive the
Lady-Demoiselle Elaine, daughter
of Lord Sesar Karvall, Baron of
Karvall mills, and the sanction of
your Grace to the marriage between
them."</p>

<p>Sir Maxamon Zhorgay, Sesar
Karvall's henchman, named himself
and his lord; they brought the
Lady-Demoiselle Elaine to be wed
to Lord Trask of Traskon. The
Duke, satisfied that these were persons
whom he could address
directly, asked if the terms of the
marriage-agreement had been
reached; both parties affirmed this.
Sir Maxamon passed a scroll to the
Duke; Duke Angus began to read
the stiff and precise legal phraseology.
Marriages between noble houses
were not matters to be left open
to dispute; a great deal of spilled
blood and burned powder had
resulted from ambiguity on some
point of succession or inheritance
or dower rights. Lucas bore it
patiently; he didn't want his
great-grandchildren and Elaine's
shooting it out over a matter of a
misplaced comma.</p>

<p>"And these persons here before
us do enter into this marriage
freely?" the Duke asked, when the
reading had ended. He stepped
forward as he spoke, and his
esquire gave him the two-hand
Sword of State, heavy enough to
behead a bisonoid. Trask stepped
forward; Sesar Karvall brought
Elaine up. The lawyers and henchmen
obliqued off to the sides.
"How say you, Lord Trask?" he
asked, almost conversationally.</p>

<p>"With all my heart, your
Grace."</p>

<p>"And you, Lady-Demoiselle
Elaine?"</p>

<p>"It is my dearest wish, your
Grace."</p>

<p>The Duke took the sword by the
blade and extended it; they laid
their hands on the jeweled pommel.</p>

<p>"And do you, and your houses,
avow us, Angus, Duke of Wardshaven,
to be your sovereign prince,
and pledge fealty to us and to our
legitimate and lawful successors?"</p>

<p>"We do." Not only he and
Elaine, but all around them, and
all the throng in the gardens,
answered, the spectators in shouts.
Very clearly, above it all, somebody,
with more enthusiasm than
discretion, was bawling: "<i>Long live
Angus the First of Gram!</i>"</p>

<p>"And we, Angus, do confer upon
you two, and your houses, the right
to wear our badge as you see fit,
and pledge ourself to maintain your
rights against any and all who may
presume to invade them. And we
declare that this marriage between
you two, and this agreement between
your respective houses, does
please us, and we avow you two,
Lucas and Elaine, to be lawfully
wed, and who so questions this
marriage challenges us, in our
teeth and to our despite."</p>

<p>That wasn't exactly the wording
used by a ducal lord on Gram. It
was the formula employed by a
planetary king, like Napolyon of
Flamberge or Rodolf of Excalibur.
And, now that he thought of it,
Angus had consistently used the
royal first-person plural. Maybe
that fellow who had shouted about
Angus the First of Gram had only
been doing what he'd been paid to
do. This was being telecast, and
Omfray of Glaspyth and Ridgerd
of Didreksburg would both be
listening; as of now, they'd start
hiring mercenaries. Maybe that
would get rid of Dunnan for him.</p>

<p>The Duke gave the two-hand
sword back to his esquire. The
young knight who was carrying the
green and tawny shawl handed it
to him, and Elaine dropped the
black and yellow one from her
shoulders, the only time a respectable
woman ever did that in
public, and her mother caught and
folded it. He stepped forward and
draped the Trask colors over her
shoulders, and then took her in
his arms. The cheering broke out
again, and some of Sesar Karvall's
guardsmen began firing a pom-pom
somewhere.</p>

<hr/>

<p>It took a little longer than he
had expected to finish with the
toasts and shake hands with those
who crowded around. Finally, the
exit march started, down the long
walkway to the landing stage, and
the Duke and his party moved
away to the rear to prepare for
the wedding feast at which everybody
but the bride and groom
would celebrate. One of the bridesmaids
gave Elaine a huge sheaf of
flowers, which she was to toss
back from the escalator; she held
it in the crook of one arm and clung
to his with the other.</p>

<p>"Darling; we really made it!"
she was whispering, as though
it were too wonderful to believe.</p>

<p>Well, wasn't it?</p>

<p>One of the news cars&mdash;orange and
blue, that was Westlands Telecast
&amp; Teleprint&mdash;had floated just ahead
of them and was letting down
toward the landing stage. For a
moment, he was angry; that went
beyond the outer-orbit limits of
journalistic propriety, even for
Westlands T &amp; T. Then he laughed;
today he was too happy for anger
about anything. At the foot of the
escalator, Elaine kicked off her
gilded slippers&mdash;there was another
pair in the car; he'd seen to that
personally&mdash;and they stepped onto
the escalator and turned about.
The bridesmaids rushed forward,
and began struggling for the slippers,
to the damage and disarray
of their gowns, and when they
were half way up, Elaine heaved
the bouquet and it burst apart
among them like a bomb of colored
fragrance, and the girls below
snatched at the flowers, shrieking
deliriously. Elaine stood, blowing
kisses to everybody, and he was
shaking his clasped hands over his
head, until they were at the top.</p>

<p>When they turned and stepped
off, the orange and blue aircar
had let down directly in front of
them, blocking their way. Now
he was really furious, and started
forward with a curse. Then he
saw who was in the car.</p>

<p>Andray Dunnan, his thin face
contorted and the narrow mustache
writhing on his upper lip;
he had a slit beside the window
open and was tilting the barrel
of a submachine gun up and out
of it.</p>

<p>He shouted, and at the same time
tripped Elaine and flung her down.
He was throwing himself forward
to cover her when there was a
blasting multiple report. Something
sledged him in the chest;
his right leg crumpled under him.
He fell&mdash;</p>

<p>He fell and fell and fell, endlessly,
through darkness, out of consciousness.
</p>




<!--se:split--><h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">V</h2>


<p>He was crucified, and crowned
with a crown of thorns. Who had
they done that to? Somebody long
ago, on Terra. His arms were
drawn out stiffly, and hurt; his feet
and legs hurt, too, and he couldn't
move them, and there was this
prickling at his brow. And he was
blind.</p>

<p>No; his eyes were just closed. He
opened them, and there was a white
wall in front of him, patterned with
a blue snow-crystal design, and he
realized that it was a ceiling and
that he was lying on his back. He
couldn't move his head, but by
shifting his eyes he saw that he
was completely naked and surrounded
by a tangle of tubes and
wires, which puzzled him briefly.
Then he knew that he was not on
a bed, but on a robomedic, and the
tubes would be for medication and
wound drainage and intravenous
feeding, and the wires would be to
electrodes imbedded in his body
for diagnosis, and the crown-of-thorns
thing would be more electrodes
for an encephalograph. He'd
been on one of those robomedics
before, when he had been gored by a
bisonoid on the cattle range.</p>

<p>That was what it was; he was
still under treatment. But that
seemed so long ago; so many things&mdash;he
must have dreamed them&mdash;seemed
to have happened.</p>

<p>Then he remembered, and struggled
futilely to rise.</p>

<p>"Elaine!" he called. "Elaine,
where are you?"</p>

<p>There was a stir and somebody
came into his limited view; his
cousin, Nikkolay Trask.</p>

<p>"Nikkolay; Andray Dunnan,"
he said. "What happened to
Elaine?"</p>

<p>Nikkolay winced, as though
something he had expected to hurt
had hurt worse than he had expected.</p>

<p>"Lucas." He swallowed. "Elaine
... Elaine is dead."</p>

<p>Elaine is dead. That didn't make
sense.</p>

<p>"She was killed instantly, Lucas.
Hit six times; I don't think she
even felt the first one. She didn't
suffer at all."</p>

<p>Somebody moaned, and then he
realized that it had been himself.</p>

<p>"You were hit twice," Nikkolay
was telling him. "One in the leg;
smashed the femur. And one in the
chest. That one missed your heart
by an inch."</p>

<p>"Pity it did." He was beginning
to remember clearly, now. "I threw
her down, and tried to cover her.
I must have thrown her straight
into the burst and only caught the
last of it myself." There was something
else; oh, yes. "Dunnan. Did
they get him?"</p>

<p>Nikkolay shook his head. "He
got away. Stole the <i>Enterprise</i> and
took her off-planet."</p>

<p>"I want to get him myself."</p>

<p>He started to rise again; Nikkolay
nodded to someone out of sight.
A cool hand touched his chin, and
he smelled a woman's perfume,
nothing at all like Elaine's. Something
like a small insect bit him
on the neck. The room grew dark.</p>

<p>Elaine was dead. There was no
more Elaine, nowhere at all. Why,
that must mean there was no more
world. So that was why it had
gotten so dark.</p>

<p>He woke again, fitfully, and it
would be daylight and he could
see the yellow sky through an open
window or it would be night and
the wall-lights would be on. There
would always be somebody with
him. Nikkolay's wife, Dame
Cecelia; Rovard Grauffis; Lady
Lavina Karvall&mdash;he must have slept
a long time, for she was so much
older than he remembered&mdash;and her
brother, Burt Sandrasan. And a
woman with dark hair, in a white
smock with a gold caduceus on her
breast.</p>

<p>Once, Duchess Flavia, and once
Duke Angus himself. He asked
where he was, not much caring.
They told him, at the Ducal Palace.</p>

<p>He wished they'd all go away,
and let him go wherever Elaine
was.</p>

<p>Then it would be dark, and he
would be trying to find her, because
there was something he wanted
desperately to show her. Stars in
the sky at night, that was it. But
there were no stars, there was no
Elaine, there was no anything, and
he wished that there was no Lucas
Trask, either.</p>

<p>But there was an Andray Dunnan.
He could see him standing
black-cloaked on the terrace, the
diamonds in his beret-jewel glittering
evilly; he could see the mad face
peering at him over the rising barrel
of the submachine gun. And then
he would hunt for him without
finding him, through the cold darkness
of space.</p>

<p>The waking periods grew longer,
and during them his mind was
clear. They relieved him of his
crown of electronic thorns. The
feeding tubes came out, and they
gave him cups of broth and fruit
juice. He wanted to know why he
had been brought to the Palace.</p>

<p>"About the only thing we could
do," Rovard Grauffis told him.
"They had too much trouble at
Karvall House as it was. You
know, Sesar got shot, too."</p>

<p>"No." So that was why Sesar
hadn't come to see him. "Was he
killed?"</p>

<p>"Wounded; he's in worse shape
than you are. When the shooting
started, he went charging up the
escalator. Didn't have anything
but his dress-dagger. Dunnan gave
him a quick burst; I think that was
why he didn't have time to finish
you off. By that time, the guards
who'd been shooting blanks from
that rapid-fire gun got in a clip of
live rounds and fired at him. He got
out of there as fast as he could.
They have Sesar on a robomedic
like yours. He isn't in any danger."</p>

<p>The drainage tubes and medication
tubes came out; the tangle of
wires around him was removed, and
the electrodes with them. They
bandaged his wounds and dressed
him in a loose robe and lifted him
from the robomedic to a couch,
where he could sit up when he
wished; they began giving him
solid food, and wine to drink, and
allowed him to smoke. The woman
doctor told him he'd had a bad
time, as though he didn't know
that. He wondered if she expected
him to thank her for keeping him
alive.</p>

<p>"You'll be up and around in a
few weeks," his cousin added.
"I've seen to it that everything at
Traskon New House will be ready
for you by then."</p>

<p>"I'll never enter that house as
long as I live, and I wish that
wouldn't be more than the next
minute. That was to be Elaine's
house. I won't go to it alone."</p>

<hr/>

<p>The dreams troubled his sleep less
and less as he grew stronger. Visitors
came often, bringing amusing
little gifts, and he found that he
enjoyed their company. He wanted
to know what had really happened,
and how Dunnan had gotten
away.</p>

<p>"He pirated the <i>Enterprise</i>,"
Rovard Grauffis told him. "He had
that company of mercenaries of his,
and he'd bribed some of the people
at the Gorram shipyards. I thought
Alex would kill his chief of security
when he found out what had
happened. We can't prove anything&mdash;we're
trying hard enough to&mdash;but
we're sure Omfray of Glaspyth
furnished the money. He's been
denying it just a shade too emphatically."</p>

<p>"Then the whole thing was
planned in advance."</p>

<p>"Taking the ship was; he must
have been planning that for
months; before he started recruiting
that company. I think he meant
to do it the night before the wedding.
Then he tried to persuade the
Lady-Demoiselle Elaine to elope
with him&mdash;he seems to have actually
thought that was possible&mdash;and
when she humiliated him, he
decided to kill both of you first."
He turned to Otto Harkaman, who
had accompanied him. "As long as
I live, I'll regret not taking you
at your word and accepting your
offer, then."</p>

<p>"How did he get hold of that
Westlands Telecast and Teleprint
car?"</p>

<p>"Oh. The morning of the wedding,
he screened Westlands editorial
office and told them he had the
inside story on the marriage and
why the Duke was sponsoring it.
Made it sound as though there was
some scandal; insisted that a reporter
come to Dunnan House for
a face-to-face interview. They sent
a man, and that was the last they
saw him alive; our people found
his body at Dunnan House when we
were searching the place afterward.
We found the car at the shipyard;
it had taken a couple of hits from
the guns at Karvall House, but you
know what these press cars are
built to stand. He went directly to
the shipyard, where his men already
had the <i>Enterprise</i>; as soon as
he arrived, she lifted out."</p>

<p>He stared at the cigarette between
his fingers. It was almost
short enough to burn him. With an
effort, he leaned forward to crush
it out.</p>

<p>"Rovard, how soon will that
second ship be finished?"</p>

<p>Grauffis laughed bitterly. "Building
the <i>Enterprise</i> took everything
we had. The duchy's on the edge
of bankruptcy now. We stopped
work on the second ship six months
ago because we didn't have enough
money to keep on with her and still
get the <i>Enterprise</i> finished. We were
expecting the <i>Enterprise</i> to make
enough in the Old Federation to
finish the second one. Then, with
two ships and a base on Tanith, the
money would begin coming in
instead of going out. But now&mdash;"</p>

<p>"It leaves me where I was
on Flamberge," Harkaman added.
"Worse. King Napolyon was going
to help the Elmersans, and I'd have
gotten a command in that. It's too
late for that now."</p>

<p>He picked up his cane and used
it to push himself to his feet. The
broken leg had mended, but he was
still weak. He took a few tottering
steps, paused to lean on the cane,
and then forced himself on to the
open window and stood for a
moment staring out. Then he
turned.</p>

<p>"Captain Harkaman, it might be
that you could still get a command,
here on Gram. That's if you don't
mind commanding under me as
owner-aboard. I am going hunting
for Andray Dunnan."</p>

<p>They both looked at him. After
a moment, Harkaman said:</p>

<p>"I'd count it an honor, Lord
Trask. But where will you get a
ship?"</p>

<p>"She's half finished now. You
already have a crew for her. Duke
Angus can finish her for me, and
pay for it by pledging his new
barony of Traskon."</p>

<p>He had known Rovard Grauffis
all his life; until this moment, he
had never seen Duke Angus' henchman
show surprise.</p>

<p>"You mean, you'll trade Traskon
for that ship?" he demanded.</p>

<p>"Finished, equipped and ready
for space, yes."</p>

<p>"The Duke will agree to that,"
Grauffis said promptly. "But, Lucas;
Traskon is all you own."</p>

<p>"If I have a ship, I won't need
them. I am turning Space Viking."</p>

<p>That brought Harkaman to his
feet with a roar of approval.
Grauffis looked at him, his mouth
slightly open.</p>

<p>"Lucas Trask&mdash;Space Viking," he
said. "Now I've heard everything."</p>

<p>Well, why not? He had deplored
the effects of Viking raiding on the
Sword-Worlds, because Gram was
a Sword-World, and Traskon was
on Gram, and Traskon was to have
been the home where he and Elaine
would live and where their children
and children's children would be
born and live. Now the little point
on which all of it had rested was
gone.</p>

<p>"That was another Lucas Trask,
Rovard. He's dead, now."</p>




<!--se:split--><h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VI</h2>


<p>Grauffis excused himself to make
a screen call and then returned to
excuse himself again. Evidently
Duke Angus had dropped whatever
he was doing as soon as he heard
what his henchman had to tell him.
Harkaman was silent until after he
was out of the room, then said:</p>

<p>"Lord Trask, this is a wonderful
thing for me. It's not been pleasant
to be a shipless captain living on
strangers' bounty. I'd hate, though,
to have you think, some time, that
I'd advanced my own fortunes at
the expense of yours."</p>

<p>"Don't worry about that. If
anybody's being taken advantage
of, you are. I need a space-captain,
and your misfortune is my own
good luck."</p>

<p>Harkaman started to pack tobacco
into his pipe. "Have you
ever been off Gram, at all?" he
asked.</p>

<p>"A few years at the University
of Camelot, on Excalibur. Otherwise,
no."</p>

<p>"Well, have you any conception
of the sort of thing you're setting
yourself to?" The Space Viking
snapped his lighter and puffed.
"You know, of course, how big
the Old Federation is. You know
the figures, that is, but do they
mean anything to you? I know they
don't to a good many spacemen,
even. We talk glibly about ten to
the hundredth power, but emotionally
we still count, 'One, Two,
Three, Many.' A ship in hyperspace
logs about a light-year an hour.
You can go from here to Excalibur
in thirty hours. But you could
send a radio message announcing
the birth of a son, and he'd be a
father before it was received. The
Old Federation, where you're going
to hunt Dunnan, occupies a space-volume
of two hundred billion
cubic light-years. And you're hunting
for one ship and one man in
that. How are you going to do it,
Lord Trask?"</p>

<p>"I haven't started thinking about
how; all I know is that I have to
do it. There are planets in the Old
Federation where Space Vikings
come and go; raid-and-trade bases,
like the one Duke Angus planned
to establish on Tanith. At one
or another of them, I'll pick up
word of Dunnan, sooner or later."</p>

<p>"We'll hear where he was a
year ago, and by the time we get
there, he'll be gone for a year and
a half to two years. We've been
raiding the Old Federation for over
three hundred years, Lord Trask.
At present, I'd say there are at
least two hundred Space Viking
ships in operation. Why haven't
we raided it bare long ago? Well,
that's the answer: distance and
voyage-time. You know, Dunnan
could die of old age&mdash;which is
not a usual cause of death among
Space Vikings&mdash;before you caught
up with him. And your youngest
ship's-boy could die of old age
before he found out about it."</p>

<p>"Well, I can go on hunting for
him till I die, then. There's nothing
else that means anything to me."</p>

<p>"I thought it was something like
that. I won't be with you, all your
life. I want a ship of my own, like
the <i>Corisande</i>, that I lost on Durendal.
Some day, I'll have one. But
till you can command your own
ship, I'll command her for you.
That's a promise."</p>

<p>Some note of ceremony seemed
indicated. Summoning a robot, he
had it pour wine for them, and they
pledged each other.</p>

<p>Rovard Grauffis had recovered his
aplomb by the time he returned
accompanied by the Duke. If Angus
had ever lost his, he gave no
indication of it. The effect on everybody
else was literally seismic. The
generally accepted view was that
Lord Trask's reason had been unhinged
by his tragic loss; there
might, he conceded, be more than
a crumb of truth in that. At first,
his cousin Nikkolay raged at him
for alienating the barony from
the family, and then he learned that
Duke Angus was appointing him
vicar-baron and giving him Traskon
New House for his residence. Immediately
he began acting like one
at the death-bed of a rich grandmother.
The Wardshaven financial
and industrial barons, whom he had
known only distantly, on the other
hand, came flocking around him,
offering assistance and hailing him
as the savior of the duchy. Duke
Angus' credit, almost obliterated
by the loss of the <i>Enterprise</i>, was
firmly re-established, and theirs
with it.</p>

<p>There were conferences at which
lawyers and bankers argued interminably;
he attended a few at
first, found himself completely uninterested,
and told everybody so.
All he wanted was a ship; the best
ship possible, as soon as possible.
Alex Gorram had been the first
to be notified; he had commenced
work on the unfinished sister-ship
of the <i>Enterprise</i> immediately. Until
he was strong enough to go to the
shipyard himself, he watched the
work on the two-thousand-foot
globular skeleton by screen, and
conferred either in person or by
screen with engineers and shipyard
executives. His rooms at the ducal
palace were converted, almost overnight,
from sickrooms to offices.
The doctors, who had recently been
urging him to find new interests
and activities, were now warning
of the dangers of overexertion.
Harkaman finally added his voice
to theirs.</p>

<p>"You take it easy, Lucas." They
had dropped formality and were on
a first-name basis now. "You got
hulled pretty badly; you let damage-control
work on you, and don't
strain the machinery till it's fixed.
We have plenty of time. We're not
going to get anywhere chasing
Dunnan. The only way we can
catch him is by interception. The
longer he moves around in the Old
Federation before he hears we're
after him, the more of a trail he'll
leave. Once we can establish a
predictable pattern, we'll have a
chance. Then, some time, he'll
come out of hyperspace somewhere
and find us waiting for him."</p>

<p>"Do you think he went to
Tanith?"</p>

<p>Harkaman heaved himself out
of his chair and prowled about the
room for a few minutes, then came
back and sat down again.</p>

<p>"No. That was Duke Angus'
idea, not his. He couldn't put in a
base on Tanith, anyhow. You know
the kind of a crew he has."</p>

<p>There had been an extensive inquiry
into Dunnan's associates and
accomplices; Duke Angus was still
hoping for positive proof to implicate
Omfray of Glaspyth in the
piracy. Dunnan had with him a
dozen and a half employees of the
Gorram shipyards whom he had
corrupted. There was some technical
ability among them, but for
the most part they were agitators
and trouble-makers and incompetent
workmen. Even under the
circumstances, Alex Gorram was
glad to see the last of them. As for
Dunnan's own mercenary company,
there were about a score of former
spacemen among them; the rest
graded down from bandits through
thugs and sneak-thieves to barroom
bums. Dunnan himself was an
astrogator, not an engineer.</p>

<p>"That gang aren't even good
enough for routine raiding," Harkaman
said. "They'd never under
any circumstances be able to put
in a base on Tanith. Unless Dunnan's
completely crazy, which I
doubt, he's gone to some regular
Viking base planet, like Hoth or
Nergal or Dagon or Xochitl, to
recruit officers and engineers and
able spacemen."</p>

<p>"All that machinery and robotic
equipment and so on that was
going to Tanith&mdash;was that aboard
when he took the ship?"</p>

<p>"Yes, and that's another reason
why he'd go to some planet like
Hoth or Nergal or Xochitl. On a
Viking-occupied planet in the Old
Federation, that stuff's almost
worth its weight in gold."</p>

<p>"What's Tanith like?"</p>

<p>"Almost completely Terra-type,
third of a Class-G sun. Very much
like Haulteclere or Flamberge. It
was one of the last planets the
Federation colonized before the Big
War. Nobody knows what happened,
exactly. There wasn't any
interstellar war; at least, you don't
find any big slag-puddles where
cities used to be. They probably
did a lot of fighting among themselves,
after they got out of the
Federation. There's still some traces
of combat-damage around. Then
they started to decivilize, down to
the pre-mechanical level&mdash;wind and
water power and animal power.
They have draft-animals that look
like introduced Terran carabaos,
and a few small sailboats and big
canoes and bateaux on the rivers.
They have gunpowder, which seems
to be the last thing any people lose.</p>

<p>"I was there, five years ago.
I liked Tanith for a base. There's
one moon, almost solid nickel
iron, and fissionable-ore deposits.
Then, like a fool, I hired out to
the Elmersans on Durendal and
lost my ship. When I came here,
your Duke was thinking about
Xipototec. I convinced him that
Tanith was a better planet for his
purpose."</p>

<p>"Dunnan might go there, at that.
He might think he was scoring one
on Duke Angus. After all, he has
all that equipment."</p>

<p>"And nobody to use it. If I were
Dunnan, I'd go to Nergal, or
Xochitl. There are always a couple
of thousand Space Vikings on
either, spending their loot and
taking it easy between raids. He
could sign on a full crew on either.
I suggest we go to Xochitl, first.
We might pick up news of him, if
nothing else."</p>

<p>All right, they'd try Xochitl
first. Harkaman knew the planet,
and was friendly with the Haulteclere
noble who ruled it.</p>

<p>The work went on at the Gorram
shipyard; it had taken a year to
build the <i>Enterprise</i>, but the steel-mills
and engine-works were over
the preparatory work of tooling
up, and material and equipment
was flowing in a steady stream.
Lucas let them persuade him to
take more rest, and day by day
grew stronger. Soon he was spending
most of his time at the shipyard,
watching the engines go in&mdash;Abbot
lift-and-drive for normal
space, Dillingham hyperdrive,
power-converters, pseudograv, all
at the center of the globular ship.
Living quarters and workshops
went in next, all armored in collapsium-plated
steel. Then the ship
lifted out to an orbit a thousand
miles off-planet, followed by
swarms of armored work-craft and
cargo-lighters; the rest of the work
was more easily done in space. At
the same time, the four two-hundred-foot
pinnaces that would
be carried aboard were being finished.
Each of them had its own
hyperdrive engines, and could
travel as far and as fast as the ship
herself.</p>

<p>Otto Harkaman was beginning
to be distressed because the ship
still lacked a name. He didn't like
having to speak of her as "her," or
"the ship," and there were many
things soon to go on that should
be name-marked. <i>Elaine</i>, Trask
thought, at once, and almost at
once rejected it. He didn't want
her name associated with the things
that ship would do in the Old
Federation. <i>Revenge</i>, <i>Avenger</i>, <i>Retribution</i>,
<i>Vendetta</i>; none appealed to
him. A news-commentator, turgidly
eloquent about the nemesis
which the criminal Dunnan had
invoked against himself, supplied
it, <i>Nemesis</i> it was.</p>

<p>Now he was studying his new
profession of interstellar robbery
and murder against which he had
once inveighed. Otto Harkaman's
handful of followers became his
teachers. Vann Larch, guns-and-missiles,
who was also a painter;
Guatt Kirbey, sour and pessimistic,
the hyperspatial astrogator who
tried to express his science in music;
Sharll Renner, the normal-space
astrogator. Alvyn Karffard, the
exec, who had been with Harkaman
longest of all. And Sir Paytrik Morland,
a local recruit, formerly
guard-captain to Count Lionel of
Newhaven, who commanded the
ground-fighters and the combat
contragravity. They were using the
farms and villages of Traskon for
drill and practice, and he noticed
that while the <i>Nemesis</i> would carry
only five hundred ground and air
fighters, over a thousand were
being trained.</p>

<p>He commented to Rovard
Grauffis.</p>

<p>"Yes. Don't mention it outside,"
the Duke's henchman said. "You
and Sir Paytrik and Captain Harkaman
will pick the five hundred
best. The Duke will take the rest
into his service. Some of these
days, Omfray of Glaspyth will find
out what a Space Viking raid is
really like."</p>

<p>And Duke Angus would tax his
new subjects of Glaspyth to redeem
the pledges on his new barony of
Traskon. Some old Pre-Atomic
writer Harkaman was fond of
quoting had said, "Gold will not
always get you good soldiers, but
good soldiers can get you gold."</p>

<hr/>

<p>The <i>Nemesis</i> came back to the
Gorram yards and settled onto her
curved landing legs like a
monstrous spider. The <i>Enterprise</i>
had borne the Ward sword and
atom-symbol; the <i>Nemesis</i> should

bear his own badge, but the bisonoid
head, tawny on green, of
Traskon, was no longer his. He
chose a skull impaled on an upright
sword, and it was blazoned on the
ship when he and Harkaman took
her out for her shakedown cruise.</p>

<p>When they landed again at the
Gorram yards, two hundred hours
later, they learned that a tramp
freighter from Morglay had come
into Bigglersport in their absence
with news of Andray Dunnan. Her
captain had come to Wardshaven
at Duke Angus' urgent invitation
and was waiting for them at the
Ducal Palace.</p>

<p>They sat, a dozen of them, around
a table in the Duke's private apartments.
The freighter captain, a
small, precise man with a graying
beard, alternately puffed at a cigarette
and sipped from a beaker of
brandy.</p>

<p>"I spaced out from Morglay two
hundred hours ago," he was saying.
"I'd been there twelve local
days, three hundred Galactic Standard
hours, and the run from Curtana
was three hundred and twenty. This
ship, the <i>Enterprise</i>, spaced out
from there several days before I did.
I'd say she's twelve hundred hours
out of Windsor, on Curtana, now."</p>

<p>The room was still. The breeze
fluttered curtains at the open windows;
from the garden below,
winged night-things twittered.
</p>

<p>"I never expected it," Harkaman
said. "I thought he'd take the ship
out to the Old Federation at once."
He poured wine for himself. "Of
course, Dunnan's crazy. A crazy
man has an advantage, sometimes,
like a left-handed knife-fighter. He
does unexpected things."</p>

<p>"That wasn't such a crazy
move," Rovard Grauffis said. "We
have very little direct trade with
Curtana. It's only an accident we
heard about this when we did."</p>

<p>The freighter captain's beaker
was half empty. He filled it to the
brim from the decanter.</p>

<p>"She was the first Gram ship
there for years," he agreed. "That
attracted notice, of course. And
his having the blazonry changed,
from the sword and atom-symbol
to the blue crescent. And the ill-feeling
on the part of other captains
and planet-side employers about the
men he'd lured away from them."</p>

<p>"How many men and what kind?"</p>

<p>The man with the gray beard
shrugged. "I was too busy getting
a cargo together for Morglay, to
pay much attention. Almost a full
spaceship complement, officers and
spacemen of every kind. And a lot
of industrial engineers and technicians."</p>

<p>"Then he is going to use that
equipment that was aboard, and
put in a base somewhere," somebody
said.
</p>

<p>"If he left Curtana twelve hundred
hours ago, he's still in hyperspace,"
Guatt Kirbey said. "It's
over two thousand from Curtana
to the nearest Old Federation
planet."</p>

<p>"How far to Tanith?" Duke
Angus asked. "I'm sure that's
where he's gone. He'd expect me
to finish the other ship and equip
her like the <i>Enterprise</i> and send her
out; he'd want to get there first."</p>

<p>"I'd thought that Tanith would
be the last place he'd go," Harkaman
said, "but this changes the
whole outlook. He could have
gone to Tanith."</p>

<p>"He's crazy, and you're trying to
apply sane logic to him," Guatt
Kirbey said. "You're figuring what
you'd do, and you aren't crazy. Of
course, I've had my doubts, at
times, but&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Yes, he's crazy, and Captain
Harkaman's allowing for that,"
Rovard Grauffis said. "Dunnan
hates all of us. He hates his Grace,
here. He hates Lord Lucas, and
Sesar Karvall; of course, he may
think he killed both of them. He
hates Captain Harkaman. So how
could he score all of us off at once?
By taking Tanith."</p>

<p>"You say he was buying supplies
and ammunition?"</p>

<p>"That's right. Gun ammunition,
ship's missiles, and a lot of ground-defense
missiles."</p>

<p>"What was he buying them
with? Trading machinery?"</p>

<p>"No. Gold."</p>

<p>"Yes. Lothar Ffayle found out
that a lot of gold was transferred
to Dunnan from banks in Glaspyth
and Didreksburg," Grauffis said.
"He got that aboard when he took
the ship, evidently."</p>

<p>"All right," Trask said. "We
can't be sure of anything, but we
have some reasons for thinking he
went to Tanith, and that's more
than we have for any other planet
in the Old Federation. I won't try
to estimate the odds against our
finding him there, but they're a
good deal bigger anywhere else.
We'll go there, first."</p>




<!--se:split--><h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VII</h2>


<p>The outside viewscreen, which
had been vacantly gray for over
three thousand hours, was now a
vertiginous swirl of color, the
indescribable color of a collapsing
hyperspatial field. No two observers
ever saw it alike, and no
imagination could vision the actuality.
Trask found that he was
holding his breath. So, he noticed,
was Otto Harkaman, beside him.
It was something, evidently, that
nobody got used to. Even Guatt
Kirbey, the astrogator, was sitting
with his pipe clenched in his
mouth, staring at the screen.</p>

<p>Then, in an instant, the stars,
which had literally not been there
before, filled the screen with a
blaze of splendor against the black
velvet backdrop of normal space.
Dead in the center, brighter than
all the rest, Ertado's Star, the sun
of Tanith, burned yellowly. The
light from it was ten hours old.</p>

<p>"Pretty good, Guatt," Harkaman
said, picking up his cup.</p>

<p>"Good, Gehenna; it was perfect,"
somebody else said.</p>

<p>Kirbey was relighting his pipe.
"Oh, I suppose it'll have to do,"
he grudged, around the stem. He
had gray hair and an untidy mustache,
and nothing was ever quite
good enough to satisfy him. "I
could have made it a little closer.
Need three microjumps, now, and
I'll have to cut the last one pretty
fine. Now don't bother me." He
began punching buttons for data
and fiddling with setscrews and
verniers.</p>

<p>For a moment, in the screen,
Trask could see the face of Andray
Dunnan. He blinked it away and
reached for his cigarettes, and put
one in his mouth wrong-end-to.
When he reversed it and snapped
his lighter, he saw that his hand
was trembling. Otto Harkaman
must have seen that, too.</p>

<p>"Take it easy, Lucas," he whispered.
"Keep your optimism under
control. We only think he might
be here."</p>

<p>"I'm sure he is. He has to be."</p>

<p>No; that was the way Dunnan,
himself, thought. Let's be sane
about this.</p>

<p>"We have to assume he is. If we
do, and he isn't it's a disappointment.
If we don't, and he is, it's a
disaster."</p>

<p>Others, it seemed, thought the
same way. The battle-stations
board was a solid blaze of red light
for full combat readiness.</p>

<p>"All right," Kirbey said.
"Jumping."</p>

<p>Then he twisted the red handle
to the right and shoved it in
viciously. Again the screen boiled
with colored turbulence; again dark
and mighty forces stalked through
the ship like demons in a sorcerer's
tower. The screen turned featureless
gray as the pickups stared blindly
into some dimensionless noplace.
Then it convulsed with color again,
and this time Ertado's Star, still in
the center, was a coin-sized disk,
with the little sparks of its seven
planets scattered around it. Tanith
was the third&mdash;the inhabitable
planet of a G-class system usually
was. It had a single moon, barely
visible in the telescopic screen, five
hundred miles in diameter and fifty
thousand off-planet.</p>

<p>"You know," Kirbey said, as
though he was afraid to admit it,
"that wasn't too bad. I think we
can make it in one more microjump."</p>

<p>Some time, Trask supposed, he'd
be able to use the expression
"micro-" about a distance of fifty-five
million miles, too.</p>

<p>"What do you think about it?"
Harkaman asked him, as deferentially
as though seeking expert
guidance instead of examining his
apprentice. "Where should Guatt
put us?"</p>

<p>"As close as possible, of course."
That would be a light-second at
the least; if the <i>Nemesis</i> came out
of hyperspace any closer to anything
the size of Tanith, the collapsing
field itself would kick her
back. "We have to assume Dunnan's
been there at least nine
hundred hours. By that time, he
could have put in a detection-station,
and maybe missile-launchers,
on the moon. The <i>Enterprise</i> carries
four pinnaces, the same as the
<i>Nemesis</i>; in his place, I'd have at
least two of them on off-planet
patrol. So let's accept it that we'll
be detected as soon as we come out
of the last jump, and come out with
the moon directly between us and
the planet. If it's occupied, we can
knock it off on the way in."</p>

<p>"A lot of captains would try to
come out with the moon masked
off by the planet," Harkaman said.</p>

<p>"Would you?"</p>

<p>The big man shook his tousled
head. "No. If they have launchers
on the moon, they could launch at
us in a curve around the planet,
by data relayed from the other side,
and we'd be at a disadvantage
replying. Just go straight in. You
hearing this, Guatt?"</p>

<p>"Yeah. It makes sense. Sort of.
Now, stop pestering me. Sharll,
look here a minute."</p>

<p>The normal-space astrogator conferred
with him; Alvyn Karffard,
the executive officer, joined them.
Finally Kirbey pulled out the big
red handle, twisted it, and said,
"All right, jumping." He shoved
it in. "I suppose I cut it too fine;
now we'll get kicked back half a
million miles."</p>

<p>The screen convulsed again; when
it cleared the third planet was
directly in the center; its small
moon, looking almost as large, was
a little above and to the right,
sunlit on one side and planetlit
on the other. Kirbey locked the
red handle, gathered up his tobacco
and lighter and things from the
ledge, and pulled down the cover
of the instrument-console, locking
it.</p>

<p>"All yours, Sharll," he told
Renner.</p>

<p>"Eight hours to atmosphere,"
Renner said. "That's if we don't
have to waste a lot of time shooting
up Junior, there."</p>

<p>Vann Larch was looking at the
moon in the six hundred power
screen.</p>

<p>"I don't see anything to shoot.
Five hundred miles; one planetbuster,
or four or five thermonuclears,"
he said.</p>

<hr/>

<p>It wasn't right, Trask thought
indignantly. Minutes ago, Tanith
had been six and a half billion
miles away. Seconds ago, fifty-odd
million. And now, a quarter of a
million, and looking close enough
to touch in the screen, it would
take them eight hours to reach it.
Why, on hyperdrive you could go
forty-eight trillion miles in that
time.</p>

<p>Well, it took a man just as long
to walk across a room today as
it had taken Pharaoh the First,
or Homo Sap.</p>

<p>In the telescopic screen Tanith
looked like any picture of any
Terra-type planet from space, with
cloud-blurred contours of seas and
continents and a vague mottling of
gray and brown and green, topped
at the pole by an icecap. None of
the surface features, not even the
major mountain ranges or rivers,
were yet distinguishable, but Harkaman
and Sharll Renner and Alvyn
Karffard and the other old hands
seemed to recognize it. Karffard
was talking by phone to Paul
Koreff, the signals-and-detection
officer, who could detect nothing
from the moon and nothing that
was getting through the Van Allen
belt from the planet.</p>

<p>Maybe they'd guessed wrong, at
that. Maybe Dunnan hadn't gone
to Tanith at all.</p>

<p>Harkaman, who had the knack
of putting himself to sleep at will,
with some sixth or <i>n</i>-th sense posted
as a sentry, leaned back in his chair
and closed his eyes. Trask wished
he could, too. It would be hours
before anything happened, and
until then he needed all the rest
he could get. He drank more coffee,
chain-smoked cigarettes; he rose
and prowled about the command
room, looking at screens. Signals-and-detection
was getting a lot of
routine stuff&mdash;Van Allen count,
micrometeor count, surface temperature,
gravitation-field strength,
radar and scanner echoes. He went
back to his chair and sat down,
staring at the screen-image. The
planet didn't seem to be getting
any closer at all, and it ought to;
they were approaching it at better
than escape velocity. He sat and
stared at it.</p>

<p>He woke with a start. The screen-image
was much larger, now. River
courses and the shadow lines of
mountains were clearly visible. It
must be early autumn in the northern
hemisphere; there was snow
down to the sixtieth parallel and
a belt of brown was pushing south
against the green. Harkaman was
sitting up, eating lunch. By the
clock, it was four hours later.</p>

<p>"Have a good nap?" he asked.
"We're picking up some stuff, now.
Radio and screen signals. Not
much, but some. The locals
wouldn't have learned enough for
that in the five years since I was
here. We didn't stay long enough,
for one thing."</p>

<p>On decivilized planets that were
visited by Space Vikings, the locals
picked up bits and scraps of technology
very quickly. In the four
months of idleness and long conversations
while they were in
hyperspace he had heard many
stories confirming that. But from
the level to which Tanith had sunk,
radio and screen communication in
five years was a little too much of
a jump.</p>

<p>"You didn't lose any men, did
you?"</p>

<p>That happened frequently&mdash;men
who took up with local women,
men who had made themselves
unpopular with their shipmates,
men who just liked the planet and
wanted to stay. They were always
welcomed by the locals for what
they could do and teach.</p>

<p>"No, we weren't there long
enough for that. Only three hundred
and fifty hours. This we're
getting is outside stuff; somebody's
there beside the locals."</p>

<p>Dunnan. He looked again at the
battle-stations board; it was still
uniformly red-lighted. Everything
was on full combat ready. He
summoned a mess-robot, selected
a couple of dishes, and began to
eat. After the first mouthful, he
called to Alvyn Karffard:</p>

<p>"Is Paul getting anything new?"
he asked.</p>

<p>Karffard checked. A little contragravity-field
distortion effect. It
was still too far to be sure. He went
back to his lunch. He had finished
it and was lighting a cigarette over
his coffee when a red light flashed
and a voice from one of the speakers
shouted.</p>

<p>"Detection! Detection from
planet! Radar, and microray!"</p>

<p>Karffard began talking rapidly
into a hand-phone; Harkaman unhooked
one beside him and listened.</p>

<p>"Coming from a definite point,
about twenty-fifth north parallel,"
he said, aside. "Could be from a ship
hiding against the planet. There's
nothing at all on the moon."</p>

<hr/>

<p>They seemed to be approaching
the planet more and more rapidly.
Actually, they weren't, the ship
was decelerating to get into an
orbit, but the decreasing distance
created the illusion of increasing
speed. The red lights flashed once
more.</p>

<p>"<i>Ship detected!</i> Just outside atmosphere,
coming around the planet
from the west."</p>

<p>"Is she the <i>Enterprise</i>?"</p>

<p>"Can't tell, yet," Karffard said,
and then cried: "There she is, in the
screen! That spark, about thirty
degrees north, just off the west
side."</p>

<p>Aboard her, too, voices from
speakers would be shouting, "Ship
detected!" and the battle station
board would be blazing red. And
Andray Dunnan, at the command-desk&mdash;</p>

<p>"She's calling us." That was
Paul Koreff's voice, out of the
squawk-box on the desk. "Standard
Sword-World impulse-code. Interrogative:
What ship are you?
Informative: her screen combination.
Request: Please communicate."</p>

<p>"All right," Harkaman said.
"Let's be polite and communicate.
What's her screen-combination?"</p>

<p>Koreff's voice gave it, and Harkaman
punched it out. The communication
screen in front of them
lit at once; Trask shoved over his
chair beside Harkaman's, his hands
tightening on the arms. Would it
be Dunnan himself, and what
would his face show when he saw
who confronted him out of his
own screen?</p>

<p>It took him an instant to realize
that the other ship was not the
<i>Enterprise</i> at all. The <i>Enterprise</i> was
the <i>Nemesis</i>' twin; her command
room was identical with his own.
This one was different in arrangements
and fittings. The <i>Enterprise</i>
was a new ship; this one was old,
and had suffered for years at the
hands of a slack captain and a
slovenly crew.</p>

<p>And the man who sat facing him
in the screen was not Andray
Dunnan, or any man he had ever
seen before. A dark-faced man, with
an old scar that ran down one cheek
from a little below the eye; he had
curly black hair, on his head and
on a V of chest exposed by an open
shirt. There was an ashtray in front
of him, and a thin curl of smoke
rose from a cigar in it, and coffee
steamed in an ornate but battered
silver cup beside it. He was grinning gleefully.</p>

<p>"Well! Captain Harkaman, of
the <i>Enterprise</i>, I believe! Welcome to
Tanith. Who's the gentleman with
you? He isn't the Duke of Wardshaven, is he?"</p>




<!--se:split--><h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">VIII</h2>


<p>He glanced quickly at the showback
over the screen, to assure himself
that his face was not betraying
him. Beside him, Otto Harkaman
was laughing.</p>

<p>"Why, Captain Valkanhayn; this
is an unexpected pleasure. That's
the <i>Space Scourge</i> you're in, I take it?
What are you doing here on
Tanith?"</p>

<p>A voice from one of the speakers
shouted that a second ship had been
detected coming over the north
pole. The dark-faced man in the
screen smirked quite complacently.</p>

<p>"That's Garvan Spasso, in the
<i>Lamia</i>," he said. "And what we're
doing here, we've taken this planet
over. We intend keeping it, too."</p>

<p>"Well! So you and Garvan have
teamed up. You two were just made
for one another. And you have a
little planet, all your very own.
I'm so happy for both of you. What
are you getting out of it&mdash;beside
poultry?"</p>

<p>The other's self-assurance started
to slip. He slapped it back into
place.</p>

<p>"Don't kid me; we know why
you're here. Well, we got here
first. Tanith is our planet. You
think you can take it away from
us?"</p>

<p>"I know we could, and so do
you," Harkaman told him. "We
outgun you and Spasso together;
why, a couple of our pinnaces
could knock the <i>Lamia</i> apart. The
only question is, do we want to
bother?"</p>

<p>By now, he had recovered from
his surprise, but not from his disappointment.
If this fellow thought
the <i>Nemesis</i> was the <i>Enterprise</i>&mdash;Before
he could check himself, he
had finished the thought aloud.</p>

<p>"Then the <i>Enterprise</i> didn't come
here at all!"</p>

<p>The man in the screen started.
"Isn't that the <i>Enterprise</i> you're
in?"</p>

<p>"Oh, no. Pardon my remissness,
Captain Valkanhayn," Harkaman
apologized. "This is the <i>Nemesis</i>.
The gentleman with me, Lord
Lucas Trask, is owner-aboard, for
whom I am commanding. Lord
Trask, Captain Boake Valkanhayn,
of the <i>Space Scourge</i>. Captain Valkanhayn
is a Space Viking." He
said that as though expecting it
to be disputed. "So, I am told, is
his associate, Captain Spasso, whose
ship is approaching. You mean
to tell me that the <i>Enterprise</i> hasn't
been here?"</p>

<p>Valkanhayn was puzzled, slightly
apprehensive.</p>

<p>"You mean the Duke of Wardshaven
has two ships?"</p>

<p>"As far as I know, the Duke of
Wardshaven hasn't any ships,"
Harkaman replied. "This ship is
the property and private adventure
of Lord Trask. The <i>Enterprise</i>, for
which we are looking, is owned
and commanded by one Andray
Dunnan."</p>

<p>The man with the scarred face
and hairy chest had picked up
his cigar and was puffing on it
mechanically. Now he took it out
of his mouth as though he wondered
how it had gotten there in
the first place.</p>

<p>"But isn't the Duke of Wardshaven
sending a ship here to establish
a base? That was what we'd
heard. We heard you'd gone from
Flamberge to Gram to command
for him."</p>

<p>"Where did you hear this? And
when?"</p>

<p>"On Hoth. That'd be about two
thousand hours ago; a Gilgamesher
brought the news from Xochitl."</p>

<p>"Well, considering it was fifth
or sixth hand, your information
was good enough, when it was
fresh. It was a year and a half old
when you got it, though. How
long have you been here on
Tanith?"</p>

<p>"About a thousand hours."
Harkaman clucked sadly at that.</p>

<p>"Pity you wasted all that time.
Well, it was nice talking to you,
Boake. Say hello to Garvan for
me when he comes up."</p>

<p>"You mean you're not staying?"
Valkanhayn was horrified, an odd
reaction for a man who had just
been expecting a bitter battle to
drive them away. "You're just
spacing right out again?"</p>

<p>Harkaman shrugged. "Do we
want to waste time here, Lord
Trask? The <i>Enterprise</i> has obviously
gone somewhere else. She was still
in hyperspace when Captain Valkanhayn
and his accomplice arrived
here."</p>

<p>"Is there anything worth staying
for?" That seemed to be the reply
Harkaman was expecting. "Beside
poultry, that is?"</p>

<p>Harkaman shook his head. "This
is Captain Valkanhayn's planet;
his and Captain Spasso's. Let them
be stuck with it."</p>

<p>"But, look; this is a good planet.
There's a big local city, maybe ten
or twenty thousand people; temples
and palaces and everything. Then,
there are a couple of old Federation
cities. The one we're at is in good
shape, and there's a big spaceport.
We've been doing a lot of work on
it. And the locals won't give you
any trouble. All they have is spears
and a few crossbows and matchlocks&mdash;"</p>

<p>"I know. I've been here."</p>

<p>"Well, couldn't we make some
kind of a deal?" Valkanhayn asked.
A mendicant whine was beginning
to creep into his voice. "I can get
Garvan on screen and switch him
over to your ship&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Well, we have a lot of Sword-World
merchandise aboard," Harkaman
said. "We could make you
good prices on some of it. How are
you fixed for robotic equipment?"</p>

<p>"But aren't you going to stay
here?" Valkanhayn was almost in
a panic. "Listen, suppose I talk to
Garvan, and we all get together on
this. Just excuse me for a
minute&mdash;"</p>

<p>As soon as he had blanked out,
Harkaman threw back his head
and guffawed as though he had
just heard the funniest and bawdiest
joke in the galaxy. Trask, himself,
didn't feel like laughing.</p>

<p>"The humor escapes me," he
admitted. "We came here on a
fools' errand."</p>

<p>"I'm sorry, Lucas." Harkaman
was still shaking with mirth. "I
know it's a letdown, but that pair
of chiseling chicken thieves! I
could almost pity them, if it
weren't so funny." He laughed
again. "You know what their idea
was?"</p>

<p>Trask shook his head. "Who are
they?"</p>

<p>"What I called them, a couple of
chicken thieves. They raid planets
like Set and Hertha and Melkarth,
where the locals haven't anything
to fight with&mdash;or anything worth
fighting for. I didn't know they'd
teamed up, but that figures. Nobody
else would team up with either of
them. What must have happened,
this story of Duke Angus' Tanith
adventure must have filtered out to
them, and they thought that if
they got here first, I'd think it was
cheaper to take them in than run
them out. I probably would have,
too. They do have ships, of a sort,
and they do raid, after a fashion.
But now, there isn't going to be
any Tanith base, and they have
a no-good planet and they're stuck
with it."</p>

<p>"Can't they make anything out
of it themselves?"</p>

<p>"Like what?" Harkaman hooted.
"They have no equipment, and they
have no men. Not for a job like
that. The only thing they can do is
space out and forget it."</p>

<p>"We could sell them equipment."</p>

<p>"We could if they had anything
to use for money. They haven't.
One thing, we do want to let down
and give the men a chance to walk
on ground and look at a sky for a
while. The girls here aren't too bad,
either," Harkaman said. "As I
remember, some of them even take
a bath, now and then."</p>

<p>"That's the kind of news of
Dunnan we're going to get. By
the time we'd get to where he's
been reported, he'd be a couple of
thousand light-years away,"
he
said disgustedly. "I agree; we
ought to give the men a chance to
get off the ship, here. We can stall
this pair along for a while and we
won't have any trouble with
them."</p>

<hr/>

<p>The three ships were slowly converging
toward a point fifteen
thousand miles off-planet and over
the sunset line. The <i>Space Scourge</i>
bore the device of a mailed fist
clutching a comet by the head; it
looked more like a whisk broom
than a scourge. The <i>Lamia</i> bore a
coiled snake with the head, arms
and bust of a woman. Valkanhayn
and Spasso were taking their time
about screening back, and he began
to wonder if they weren't maneuvering
the <i>Nemesis</i> into a cross-fire
position. He mentioned this to
Harkaman and Alvyn Karffard;
they both laughed.</p>

<p>"Just holding ship's meetings,"
Karffard said. "They'll be yakking
back and forth for a couple of
hours, yet."</p>

<p>"Yes; Valkanhayn and Spasso
don't own their ships," Harkaman
explained. "They've gone in debt
to their crews for supplies and
maintenance till everybody owns
everything in common. The ships
look like it, too. They don't even
command, really; they just preside
over elected command-councils."</p>

<p>Finally, they had both of the
more or less commanders on screen.
Valkanhayn had zipped up his
shirt and put on a jacket. Garvan
Spasso was a small man, partly
bald. His eyes were a shade too
close together, and his thin mouth
had a bitterly crafty twist. He began
speaking at once:</p>

<p>"Captain, Boake tells me you say
you're not here in the service of the
Duke of Wardshaven at all." He
said it aggrievedly.</p>

<p>"That's correct," Harkaman
said. "We came here because Lord
Trask thought another Gram ship,
the <i>Enterprise</i>, would be here. Since
she isn't, there's no point in our
being here. We do hope, though,
that you won't make any difficulty
about our letting down and giving
our men a couple of hundred hours'
liberty. They've been in hyperspace
for three thousand hours."</p>

<p>"See!" Spasso clamored. "He
wants to trick us into letting him
land&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Captain Spasso," Trask cut in.
"Will you please stop insulting
everybody's intelligence, your own
included." Spasso glared at him,
belligerently but hopefully. "I understand
what you thought you
were going to do here. You expected
Captain Harkaman here to
establish a base for the Duke of
Wardshaven, and you thought, if
you were here ahead of him and in
a posture of defense, that he'd take
you into the Duke's service rather
than waste ammunition and risk
damage and casualties wiping you
out. Well, I'm very sorry, gentlemen.
Captain Harkaman is in my
service, and I'm not in the least
interested in establishing a base on
Tanith."</p>

<p>Valkanhayn and Spasso looked at
each other. At least, in the two
side-by-side screens, their eyes
shifted, each to the other's screen
on his own ship.</p>

<p>"I get it!" Spasso cried suddenly.
"There's two ships, the <i>Enterprise</i>
and this one. The Duke of Wardshaven
fitted out the <i>Enterprise</i>,
and somebody else fitted out this
one. They both want to put in a
base here!"</p>

<p>That opened a glorious vista.
Instead of merely capitalizing on
their nuisance-value, they might
find themselves holding the balance
of power in a struggle for the
planet. All sorts of profitable perfidies
were possible.</p>

<p>"Why, sure you can land, Otto,"
Valkanhayn said. "I know what
it's like to be three thousand hours
in hyper, myself."</p>

<p>"You're at this old city with the
two tall tower-buildings, aren't
you?" Harkaman asked. He looked
up at the viewscreen. "Ought to be
about midnight there now. How's
the spaceport? When I was here, it
was pretty bad."</p>

<p>"Oh, we've been fixing it up.
We got a big gang of locals working
for us&mdash;"</p>


<p>The city was familiar, from Otto
Harkaman's descriptions and from
the pictures Vann Larch had
painted during the long jump from
Gram. As they came in, it looked
impressive, spreading for miles
around the twin buildings that
spired almost three thousand feet
above it, with a great spaceport
like an eight-pointed star at one
side. Whoever had built it, in the
sunset splendor of the old Terran
Federation, must have done so
confident that it would become the
metropolis of a populous and prospering
world. Then the sun of the
Federation had gone down. Nobody
knew what had happened on
Tanith after that, but evidently
none of it had been good.</p>

<p>At first, the two towers seemed
as sound as when they had been
built; gradually it became apparent
that one was broken at the top.
For the most part, the smaller
buildings scattered widely around
them were standing, though here
and there mounds of brush-grown
rubble showed where some had
fallen in. The spaceport looked
good&mdash;a central octagon mass of
buildings, the landing-berths, and,
beyond, the triangular areas of
airship docks and warehouses. The
central building was outwardly
intact, and the ship-berths seemed
clear of wreckage and rubble.</p>

<p>By the time the <i>Nemesis</i> was following
the <i>Space Scourge</i> and the
<i>Lamia</i> down, towed by her own pinnaces,
the illusion that they were
approaching a living city had vanished.
The interspaces between the
buildings were choked with forest-growth,
broken by a few small
fields and garden-plots. At one time,
there had been three of the high
buildings, literally vertical cities in
themselves. Where the third had
stood was a glazed crater, with a
ridge of fallen rubble lying away
from it. Somebody must have landed
a medium missile, about twenty
kilotons, against its base. Something
of the same sort had scored on
the far edge of the spaceport, and
one of the eight arrowheads of
docks and warehouses was an indistinguishable
slag-pile.</p>

<p>The rest of the city seemed to
have died of neglect rather than
violence. It certainly hadn't been
bombed out. Harkaman thought
most of the fighting had been done
with subneutron bombs or Omega-ray
bombs, that killed the people
without damaging the real estate.
Or bio-weapons; a man-made plague
that had gotten out of control and
all but depopulated the planet.</p>

<p>"It takes an awful lot of people,
working together at an awful lot of
jobs, to keep a civilization running.
Smash the installations and kill the
top technicians and scientists, and
the masses don't know how to rebuild
and go back to stone hatchets.
Kill off enough of the masses and
even if the planet and the know-how
is left, there's nobody to do the
work. I've seen planets that decivilized
both ways. Tanith, I
think, is one of the latter."</p>

<p>That had been during one of the
long after-dinner bull sessions on
the way out from Gram. Somebody,
one of the noble gentlemen-adventurers
who had joined the company
after the piracy of the <i>Enterprise</i> and
the murder, had asked:</p>

<p>"But some of them survived.
Don't they know what happened?"</p>

<p>"<i>'In the old times, there were sorcerers.
They built the old buildings by
wizard arts. Then the sorcerers fought
among themselves and went away,'</i>"
Harkaman said. "That's all they
know about it."</p>

<p>You could make any kind of an
explanation out of that.</p>

<p>As the pinnaces pulled and nudged
the <i>Nemesis</i> down to her berth, he
could see people, far down on the
spaceport floor, at work. Either
Valkanhayn and Spasso had more
men than the size of their ships indicated,
or they had gotten a lot of
locals to work for them. More than
the population of the moribund
city, at least as Harkaman remembered
it.</p>

<p>There had been about five hundred in all;
they lived by mining the
old buildings for metal, and trading
metalwork for food and textiles
and powder and other things made
elsewhere. It was accessible only by
oxcarts traveling a hundred miles
across the plains; it had been built
by a contragravity-using people
with utter disregard for natural
travel and transportation routes.</p>

<p>"I don't envy the poor buggers,"
Harkaman said, looking down at
the antlike figures on the spaceport
floor. "Boake Valkanhayn and Garvan
Spasso have probably made
slaves of the lot of them. If I was
really going to put in a base here, I
wouldn't thank that pair for the
kind of public-relations work
they've been doing among the locals."</p>




<!--se:split--><h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">IX</h2>


<p>That was just about the situation.
Spasso and Valkanhayn and some
of their officers met them on the
landing stage of the big building in
the middle of the spaceport, where
they had established quarters. Entering
and going down a long hallway,
they passed a dozen men and
women gathering up rubbish from
the floor with shovels and with
their hands and putting it into a
lifter-skid. Both sexes wore shapeless
garments of coarse cloth, like
ponchos, and flat-soled sandals.
Watching them was another local in
a kilt, buskins and a leather jerkin;
he wore a short sword on his belt
and carried a wickedly thonged
whip. He also wore a Space Viking
combat helmet, painted with the
device of Spasso's <i>Lamia</i>. He bowed
as they approached, putting a hand
to his forehead. After they had
passed, they could hear him shouting
at the others, and the sound of
whip-blows.</p>

<p>You make slaves out of people,
and some will always be slave-drivers;
they will bow to you, and
then take it out on the others.
Harkaman's nose was twitching as
though he had a bit of rotten fish
caught in his mustache.</p>

<p>"We have about eight hundred of
them. There were only three hundred
that were any good for work
here; we gathered the rest up at
villages along the big river,"
Spasso was saying.</p>

<p>"How do you get food for them?"
Harkaman asked. "Or don't you
bother?"</p>

<p>"Oh, we gather that up all over,"
Valkanhayn told him. "We send
parties out with landing craft.
They'll let down on a village, run
the locals out, gather up what's
around and bring it here. Once in a
while they put up a fight, but the
best they have is a few crossbows
and some muzzle-loading muskets.
When they do, we burn the village
and machine-gun everybody we
see."</p>

<p>"That's the stuff," Harkaman
approved. "If the cow doesn't want
to be milked, just shoot her. Of
course, you don't get much milk
out of her again, but&mdash;"</p>

<p>The room to which their hosts
guided them was at the far end of
the hall. It had probably been a
conference room or something of the
sort, and originally it had been
paneled, but the paneling had long
ago vanished. Holes had been dug
here and there in the walls, and he
remembered having noticed that
the door was gone and the metal
groove in which it had slid had
been pried out.</p>

<p>There was a big table in the middle,
and chairs and couches covered
with colored spreads. All the
furniture was handmade, cunningly
pegged together and highly polished.
On the walls hung trophies
of weapons&mdash;thrusting-spears and
throwing-spears, crossbows and
quarrels, and a number of heavy
guns, crude things, but carefully
made.</p>

<p>"Pick all this stuff up off the locals?"
Harkaman asked.</p>

<p>"Yes, we got most of it at a big
town down at the forks of the river,"
Valkanhayn said. "We shook
it down a couple of times. That's
where we recruited the fellows
we're using to boss the workers."</p>

<p>Then he picked up a stick with a
leather-covered knob and beat on
a gong, bawling for wine. A voice,
somewhere, replied, "Yes, master;
I come!" and in a few moments a
woman entered carrying a jug in
either hand. She was wearing a blue
bathrobe several sizes too large for
her, instead of the poncho things
the slaves in the hallway wore. She
had dark brown hair and gray eyes;
if she had not been so obviously
frightened she would have been
beautiful. She set the jugs on the
table and brought silver cups from
a chest against the wall: when
Spasso dismissed her, she went out
hastily.</p>

<p>"I suppose it's silly to ask if
you're paying these people anything
for the work they do or for the
things you take from them," Harkaman
said. From the way the <i>Space Scourge</i>
and <i>Lamia</i> people laughed, it
evidently was. Harkaman shrugged.
"Well, it's your planet. Make any
kind of a mess out of it you want
to."</p>

<p>"You think we <i>ought</i> to pay
them?" Spasso was incredulous.
"Damn bunch of savages!"</p>

<p>"They aren't as savage as the
Xochitl locals were when Haulteclere
took it over. You've been
there; you've seen what Prince Viktor
does with them now."</p>

<p>"We haven't got the men or
equipment they have on Xochitl,"
Valkanhayn said. "We can't afford
to coddle the locals."</p>

<p>"You can't afford not to," Harkaman
told him. "You have two
ships, here. You can only use one
for raiding; the other will have to
stay here to hold the planet. If you
take them both away, the locals,
whom you have been studiously
antagonizing, will swamp whoever
you leave behind. And if you don't
leave anybody behind, what's the
use of having a planetary base?"</p>

<p>"Well, why don't you join us,"
Spasso finally came out with it.
"With our three ships we could
have a real thing, here."</p>

<p>Harkaman looked at him inquiringly.
"The gentlemen," Trask
said, "are putting this wrongly.
They mean, why don't we let them
join us?"</p>

<p>"Well, if you want to put it
like that," Valkanhayn conceded.
"We'll admit, your <i>Nemesis</i> would
be the big end of it. But why not?
Three ships, we could have a real
base here. Nikky Gratham's father
only had two when he started on
Jagannath, and look what the Grathams
got there now."</p>

<p>"Are we interested?" Harkaman
asked.</p>

<p>"Not very, I'm afraid. Of course,
we've just landed; Tanith may have
great possibilities. Suppose we reserve
decision for a while and look
around a little."</p>


<p>There were stars in the sky, and,
for good measure, a sliver of moon
on the western horizon. It was only
a small moon, but it was close. He
walked to the edge of the landing
stage, and Elaine was walking with
him. The noise from inside, where
the <i>Nemesis</i> crew were feasting with
those of the <i>Lamia</i> and <i>Space Scourge</i>,
grew fainter. To the south,
a star moved; one of the pinnaces
they had left on off-planet watch.
There was firelight far below, and
he could hear singing. Suddenly he
realized that it was the poor devils
of locals whom Valkanhayn and
Spasso had enslaved. Elaine went
away quickly.</p>

<p>"Have your fill of Space Viking
glamour, Lucas?"</p>

<p>He turned. It was Baron Rathmore,
who had come along to serve
for a year or so and then hitch a
ride home from some base planet
and cash in politically on having
been with Lucas Trask.</p>

<p>"For the moment. I'm told that
this lot aren't typical."</p>

<p>"I hope not. They're a pack of
sadistic brutes, and piggish along
with it."</p>

<p>"Well, brutality and bad manners
I can condone, but Spasso and Valkanhayn
are a pair of ignominious
little crooks, and stupid along with
it. If Andray Dunnan had gotten
here ahead of us, he might have
done one good thing in his wretched
life. I can't understand why he
didn't come here."</p>

<p>"I think he still will," Rathmore
said. "I knew him and I knew
Nevil Ormm. Ormm's ambitious,
and Dunnan is insanely vindictive&mdash;"
He broke off with a sour
laugh. "I'm telling <i>you</i> that!"</p>

<p>"Why didn't he come here directly,
then?"</p>

<p>"Maybe he doesn't want a base
on Tanith. That would be something
constructive; Dunnan's a destroyer.
I think he took that cargo
of equipment somewhere and sold
it. I think he'll wait till he's fairly
sure the other ship is finished. Then
he'll come in and shoot the place
up, the way&mdash;" He bit that off
abruptly.</p>

<p>"The way he did my wedding; I
think of it all the time."</p>

<hr/>

<p>The next morning, he and Harkaman
took an aircar and went to
look at the city at the forks of the
river. It was completely new, in
the sense that it had been built
since the collapse of Federation
civilization and the loss of civilized
technologies. It was huddled on a
long, irregularly triangular mound,
evidently to raise it above flood-level.
Generations of labor must
have gone into it. To the eyes of a
civilization using contragravity and
powered equipment it wasn't at
all impressive. Fifty to a hundred
men with adequate equipment could
have gotten the thing up in a
summer. It was only by forcing
himself to think in terms of spadeful
after spadeful of earth, cartload
after cartload creaking behind
straining beasts, timber after timber
cut with axes and dressed with
adzes, stone after stone and brick
after brick, that he could appreciate
it. They even had it walled, with
a palisade of tree-trunks behind
which earth and rocks had been
banked, and along the river were
docks, at which boats were moored.
The locals simply called it Tradetown.</p>

<p>As they approached, a big gong
began booming, and a white puff of
smoke was followed by the thud
of a signal-gun. The boats, long
canoe-like craft and round-bowed,
many-oared barges, put out hastily
into the river; through binoculars
they could see people scattering
from the surrounding fields, driving
cattle ahead of them. By the time
they were over the city, nobody
was in sight. They seemed to have
developed a pretty fair air-raid
warning system in the nine-hundred-odd
hours in which they had
been exposed to the figurative
mercies of Boake Valkanhayn and
Garvan Spasso. It hadn't saved
them entirely; a section of the city
had been burned, and there were
evidences of shelling. Light chemical-explosive
stuff; this city was
too good a cow for even those two
to kill before the milking was
over.</p>

<p>They circled slowly over it at
a thousand feet. When they turned
away, black smoke began rising
from what might have been pottery
works or brick-kilns on the outskirts;
something resinous had evidently
been fed to the fires. Other
columns of black smoke began rising
across the countryside on both
sides of the river.</p>

<p>"You know, these people are
civilized, if you don't limit the
term to contragravity and nuclear
energy," Harkaman said. "They
have gunpowder, for one thing,
and I can think of some rather impressive
Old Terran civilizations
that didn't have that much. They
have an organized society, and
anybody who has that is starting
toward civilization."</p>

<p>"I hate to think of what'll happen
to this planet if Spasso and
Valkanhayn stay here long."</p>

<p>"Might be a good thing, in the
long run. Good things in the long
run are often tough while they're
happening. I know what'll happen
to Spasso and Valkanhayn, though.
They'll start decivilizing, themselves.
They'll stay here for a while,
and when they need something they
can't take from the locals they'll
go chicken-stealing after it, but
most of the time they'll stay here
lording it over their slaves, and
finally their ships will wear out
and they won't be able to fix them.
Then, some time, the locals'll
jump them when they aren't watching
and wipe them out. But in the
meantime, the locals'll learn a lot
from them."</p>

<p>They turned the aircar west
again along the river. They looked
at a few villages. One or two dated
from the Federation period; they
had been plantations before whatever
it was had happened. More
had been built within the past five
centuries. A couple had recently
been destroyed, in punishment for
the crime of self-defense.</p>

<p>"You know," he said, at length,
"I'm going to do everybody a favor.
I'm going to let Spasso and Valkanhayn
persuade me to take this
planet away from them."</p>

<p>Harkaman, who was piloting,
turned sharply. "You crazy or
something?"</p>

<p>"'When somebody makes a
statement you don't understand,
don't tell him he's crazy. Ask him
what he means.' Who said that?"</p>

<p>"On target," Harkaman grinned.
"'What <i>do</i> you mean, Lord
Trask?'"</p>

<p>"I can't catch Dunnan by pursuit;
I'll have to get him by interception.
You know the source of
that quotation, too. This looks to
me like a good place to intercept
him. When he learns I have a base
here, he'll hit it, sooner or later.
And even if he doesn't, we can
pick up more information on him,
when ships start coming in here,
than we would batting around all
over the Old Federation."</p>

<p>Harkaman considered for a moment,
then nodded. "Yes, if we
could set up a base like Nergal or
Xochitl," he agreed. "There'll be
four or five ships, Space Vikings,
traders, Gilgameshers and so on,
on either of those planets all the
time. If we had the cargo Dunnan
took to space in the <i>Enterprise</i>, we
could start a base like that. But we
haven't anything near what we
need, and you know what Spasso
and Valkanhayn have."</p>

<p>"We can get it from Gram. As
it stands, the investors in the
Tanith Adventure, from Duke Angus
down, lost everything they
put into it. If they're willing to
throw some good money after bad,
they can get it back, and a handsome
profit to boot. And there
ought to be planets above the rowboat
and ox-cart level not too far
away that could be raided for a lot
of things we'd need."</p>

<p>"That's right; I know of half a
dozen within five hundred light-years.
They won't be the kind
Spasso and Valkanhayn are in the
habit of raiding, though. And
besides machinery, we can get gold,
and valuable merchandise that
could be sold on Gram. And if
we could make a go of it, you'd
go farther hunting Dunnan by
sitting here on Tanith than by
going looking for him. That was
the way we used to hunt marsh
pigs on Colada, when I was a kid;
just find a good place and sit down
and wait."

</p>

<hr/>

<p><!--Beginning of 2nd installment.-->
They had Valkanhayn and Spasso
aboard the <i>Nemesis</i> for dinner; it
didn't take much guiding to keep the
conversation on the subject of Tanith
and its resources, advantages and
possibilities. Finally, when they had
reached brandy and coffee, Trask said
idly:</p>

<p>"I believe, together, we could
really make something out of this
planet."</p>

<p>"That's what we've been telling
you, all along," Spasso broke in eagerly.
"This is a wonderful planet&mdash;"</p>

<p>"It could be. All it has now is possibilities.
We'd need a spaceport, for
one thing."</p>

<p>"Well, what's this, here?" Valkanhayn
wanted to know.</p>

<p>"It was a spaceport," Harkaman
told him. "It could be one again. And
we'd need a shipyard, capable of any
kind of heavy repair work. Capable
of building a complete ship, in fact.
I never saw a ship come into a Viking
base planet with any kind of a
cargo worth dickering over that hadn't
taken some damage getting it.
Prince Viktor of Xochitl makes a
good half of his money on ship repairs,
and so do Nikky Gratham on
Jagannath and the Everrards on Hoth."</p>

<p>"And engine works, hyperdrive,
normal space and pseudograv," Trask
added. "And a steel mill, and a collapsed-matter
plant. And robotic-equipment
works, and&mdash;"</p>

<p>"Oh, that's out of all reason!" Valkanhayn
cried. "It would take twenty
trips with a ship the size of this one
to get all that stuff here, and how'd
we ever be able to pay for it?"</p>

<p>"That's the sort of base Duke Angus
of Wardshaven planned. The
<i>Enterprise</i>, practically a duplicate of
the <i>Nemesis</i>, carried everything that
would be needed to get it started,
when she was pirated."</p>

<p>"When she was&mdash;?"</p>

<p>"Now you're going to have to tell
the gentlemen the truth," Harkaman
chuckled.</p>

<p>"I intend to." He laid his cigar
down, sipped some of his brandy, and
explained about Duke Angus' Tanith
adventure. "It was part of a larger
plan; Angus wanted to gain economic
supremacy for Wardshaven to forward
his political ambitions. It was,
however, an entirely practical business
proposition. I was opposed to it,
because I thought it would be too
good a proposition for Tanith and
work to the disadvantage of the home
planet in the end." He told them
about the <i>Enterprise</i>, and the cargo
of industrial and construction equipment
she carried, and then told them
how Andray Dunnan had pirated
her.</p>

<p>"That wouldn't have annoyed me
at all; I had no money invested in the
project. What did annoy me, to put
it mildly, was that just before he took
the ship out, Dunnan shot up my
wedding, wounded me and my
father-in-law, and killed the lady to
whom I had been married for less
than half an hour. I fitted out this ship
at my own expense, took on Captain
Harkaman, who had been left without
a command when the <i>Enterprise</i>
was pirated, and came out here to
hunt Dunnan down and kill him. I
believe that I can do that best by establishing
a base on Tanith myself.
The base will have to be operated at
a profit, or it can't be operated at all."
He picked up the cigar again and
puffed slowly. "I am inviting you
gentlemen to join me as partners."</p>

<p>"Well, you still haven't told us
how we're going to get the money to
finance it," Spasso insisted.</p>

<p>"The Duke of Wardshaven, and
the others who invested in the original
Tanith adventure will put it up.
It's the only way they can recover
what they lost on the <i>Enterprise</i>."</p>

<p>"But then, this Duke of Wardshaven
will be running it, not us,"
Valkanhayn objected.</p>

<p>"The Duke of Wardshaven," Harkaman
reminded him, "is on Gram.
We are here on Tanith. There are
three thousand light-years between."</p>

<p>That seemed a satisfactory answer.
Spasso, however, wanted to know
who would run things here on Tanith.</p>

<p>"We'll have to hold a meeting of
all three crews," he began.</p>

<p>"We will do nothing of the kind,"
Trask told him. "I will be running
things here on Tanith. You people
may allow your orders to be debated
and voted on, but I don't. You will
inform your respective crews to that
effect. Any orders you give them in
my name will be obeyed without
argument."</p>

<p>"I don't know how the men'll take
that," Valkanhayn said.</p>

<p>"I know how they'll take it if
they're smart," Harkaman told him.
"And I know what'll happen if they
aren't. I know how you've been running
your ships, or how your ships'
crews have been running you. Well,
we don't do it that way. Lucas Trask
is owner, and I'm captain. I obey his
orders on what's to be done, and everybody
else obeys mine on how to
do it."</p>

<p>Spasso looked at Valkanhayn, then
shrugged. "That's how the man
wants it, Boake. You want to give
him an argument? I don't."</p>

<p>"The first order," Trask said, "is
that these people you have working
here are to be paid. They are not to
be beaten by these plug-uglies you
have guarding them. If any of them
want to leave, they may do so; they
will be given presents and furnished
transportation home. Those who
wish to stay will be issued rations,
furnished with clothing and bedding
and so on as they need it, and paid
wages. We'll work out some kind of a
pay-token system and set up a commissary
where they can buy things."</p>

<p>Disks of plastic or titanium or
something, stamped and uncounterfeitable.
Get Alvyn Karffard to see
about that. Organize work-gangs, and
promote the best and most intelligent
to foremen. And those guards
could be taken in hand by some
ground-fighter sergeant and given
Sword-World weapons and tactical
training; use them to train others;
they'd need a sepoy army of some
sort. Even the best of good will is no
substitute for armed force, conspicuously
displayed and unhesitatingly
used when necessary.</p>

<p>"And there'll be no more of this
raiding villages for food or anything
else. We will pay for anything we get
from any of the locals."</p>

<p>"We'll have trouble about that,"
Valkanhayn predicted. "Our men
think anything a local has belongs to
anybody who can take it."</p>

<p>"So do I," Harkaman said. "On a
planet I'm raiding. This is our planet,
and our locals. We don't raid our
own planet or our own people. You'll
just have to teach them that."</p>




<!--se:split--><h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">X</h2>


<p>It took Valkanhayn and Spasso
more time and argument to convince
their crews than Trask thought necessary.
Harkaman seemed satisfied,
and so was Baron Rathmore, the
Wardshaven politician.</p>

<p>"It's like talking a lot of uncommitted
small landholders into taking
somebody's livery-and-maintenance,"
the latter said. "You can't use too
much pressure; make them think it's
their own idea."</p>

<p>There were meetings of both
crews, with heated arguments; Baron
Rathmore made frequent speeches,
while Lord Trask of Tanith and Admiral
Harkaman&mdash;the titles were
Rathmore's suggestion&mdash;remained
loftily aloof. On both ships, everybody
owned everything in common, which
meant that nobody owned anything.
They had taken over Tanith on the
same basis of diffused ownership, and
nobody in either crew was quite
stupid enough to think that they
could do anything with the planet by
themselves. By joining the <i>Nemesis</i>,
it appeared that they were getting
something for nothing. In the end,
they voted to place themselves under
the authority of Lord Trask and Admiral
Harkaman. After all, Tanith
would be a feudal lordship, and the
three ships together a fleet.</p>

<p>Admiral Harkaman's first act of
authority was to order a general inspection
of fleet units. He wasn't
shocked by the condition of the two
ships, but that was only because he
had expected much worse. They were
spaceworthy; after all, they had gotten
here from Hoth under their own
power. They were only combat-worthy
if the combat weren't too severe.
His original estimate that the
<i>Nemesis</i> could have knocked both of
them to pieces was, if anything, over-conservative.
The engines were only
in fair shape, and the armament was
bad.</p>

<p>"We aren't going to spend our
time sitting here on Tanith," he told
the two captains. "This planet is a
raiding base, and 'raiding' is the operative
word. And we are not going to
raid easy planets. A planet that can
be raided with impunity isn't worth
the time it takes getting to it. We are
going to have to fight on every planet
we hit, and I am not going to jeopardize
the lives of the men under me,
which includes your crews as well as
mine, because of under-powered and
under-armed ships."</p>

<p>Spasso tried to argue. "We've been
getting along."</p>

<p>Harkaman cursed. "Yes. I know
how you've been getting along;
chicken-stealing on planets like Set
and Xipototec and Melkarth. Not
making enough to cover maintenance
expenses; that's why your ship's in
the shape she is. Well, those days are
over. Both ships ought to have a full
overhaul, but we'll have to skip that
till we have a shipyard of our own.
But I will insist, at least, that your
guns and launchers are in order. And
your detection equipment; you didn't
get a fix on the <i>Nemesis</i> till we were
less than twenty thousand miles off-planet."</p>

<p>"We had better get the <i>Lamia</i> in
condition first," Trask said. "We can
put her on off-planet watch, instead
of that pair of pinnaces."</p>

<hr/>

<p>Work on the <i>Lamia</i> started the
next day, and considerable friction-heat
was generated between her officers
and the engineers sent over from
the <i>Nemesis</i>. Baron Rathmore went
aboard, and came back laughing.</p>

<p>"You know how that ship's run?"
he asked. "There's a sort of soviet of
officers; chief engineer, exec, guns-and-missiles,
astrogator and so on.
Spasso's just an animated ventriloquist's
dummy. I talked to all of
them. None of them can pin me down
to anything, but they think we're going
to heave Spasso out of command
and appoint one of them, and each
one thinks he'll be it. I don't know
how long that'll last, it's a string-and-tape
job like the one we're having to
do on the ship. It'll hold till we get
something better."</p>

<p>"We'll have to get rid of Spasso,"
Harkaman agreed. "I think we'll put
one of our own people in his place.
Valkanhayn can stay in command of
the <i>Space Scourge</i>; he's a spaceman.
But Spasso's no good for anything."</p>

<p>The local problem was complicated,
too. The locals spoke Lingua
Terra of a sort, like every descendant
of the race that had gone out from
the Sol system in the Third Century,
but it was a barely comprehensible
sort. On civilized planets, the language
had been frozen unalterably in
microbooks and voice tapes. But
microbooks can only be read and
sound tapes heard with the aid of
electricity, and Tanith had lost that
long ago.</p>

<p>Most of the people Spasso and
Valkanhayn had kidnaped and enslaved
came from villages within a
radius of five hundred miles. About
half of them wanted to be repatriated;
they were given gifts of knives,
tools, blankets, and bits of metal
which seemed to be the chief standard
of value and medium of exchange,
and shipped home. Finding
their proper villages was not easy. At
each such village, the news was
spread that the Space Vikings would
hereafter pay for what they received.</p>

<hr/>

<p>The <i>Lamia</i> was overhauled as rapidly
as possible. She was still far from
being a good ship, but she was much
closer to being one than before. She was
fitted with the best detection equipment
that could be assembled, and
put on orbit; Alvyn Karffard took
command of her, with some of Spasso's
officers, some of Valkanhayn's,
and a few from the <i>Nemesis</i>. Harkaman

was intending to use her for retraining
of all the <i>Lamia</i> and <i>Space
Scourge</i> officers, and rotated them
back and forth.</p>

<p>The labor guards, a score in number,
were relieved of their duties, issued
Sword-World firearms, and
given intensive training. The trade
tokens, stamps of colored plastic,
were introduced, and a store was set
up where they could be exchanged
for Sword-World items. After a
while, it dawned on the locals that
the tokens could also be used for
trading among themselves; money
seemed to have been one of the adjuncts
of civilization that had been
lost along Tanith's downward path.
A few of them were able to use contragravity
hand-lifters and hand-towed
lifter-skids; several were even
learning to operate things like bulldozers,
at least to the extent of knowing
which lever or button did what.
Give them a little time, Trask
thought, watching a gang at work
down on the spaceport floor. It won't
be many years before half of them
will be piloting aircars.</p>

<hr/>

<p>As soon as the <i>Lamia</i> was on orbital
watch, the <i>Space Scourge</i> was
set down at the spaceport and work
started on her. It was decided that
Valkanhayn would take her to Gram;
enough <i>Nemesis</i> people would go
along to insure good faith on his
part, and to talk to Duke Angus and
the Tanith investors. Baron Rathmore,
and Paytrik Morland, and several
other Wardshaven gentlemen-adventurers
for the latter function;
Alvyn Karffard to act as Valkanhayn's
exec, with private orders to
supersede him in command if necessary,
and Guatt Kirbey to do the astrogating.</p>

<p>"We'll have to take the <i>Nemesis</i>
and the <i>Space Scourge</i> out, first, and
make a big raid," Harkaman said.
"We can't send the <i>Space Scourge</i>
back to Gram empty. When Baron
Rathmore and Lord Valpry and the
rest of them talk to Duke Angus and
the Tanith investors, they'll have to
have a lot more than some travel
films of Tanith. They'll have to be
able to show that Tanith is producing.
We ought to have a little money
of our own to invest, too."</p>

<p>"But, Otto; both ships?" That worried
Trask. "Suppose Dunnan comes
and finds nobody here but Spasso
and the <i>Lamia</i>?"</p>

<p>"Chance we'll have to take. Personally,
I think we have a year to a
year and a half before Dunnan shows
up here. I know, we were fooled trying
to guess what he'd do before. But
the sort of raid I have in mind, we'll
need two ships, and in any case, I
don't want to leave both those ships
here while we're gone, even if you
do."</p>

<p>"When it comes to that, I don't
think I do, either. But we can't trust
Spasso here alone, can we?"</p>

<p>"We'll leave enough of our people
to make sure. We'll leave Alvyn&mdash;that'll
mean a lot of work for me that
he'd otherwise do, on the ship. And
Baron Rathmore, and young Valpry,
and the men who've been training
our sepoys. We can shuffle things
around and leave some of Valkanhayn's
men in place of some of Spasso's.
We might even talk Spasso into
going along. That'll mean having to
endure him at our table, but it would
be wise."</p>

<p>"Have you picked a place to raid?"</p>

<p>"Three of them. First, Khepera.
That's only thirty light-years from
here. That won't amount to much;
just chicken-stealing. It'll give our
green hands some relatively safe
combat-training, and it'll give us
some idea of how Spasso's and Valkanhayn's
people behave, and give
them confidence for the next job."</p>

<p>"And then?"</p>

<p>"Amaterasu. My information about
Amaterasu is about twenty years old.
A lot of things can happen in twenty
years. All I know of it&mdash;I was never
there myself&mdash;is it's fairly civilized&mdash;about
like Terra just before the beginning
of the Atomic Era. No nuclear
energy, they lost that, and of
course nothing beyond it, but they
have hydroelectric and solarelectric
power, and nonnuclear jet aircraft,
and some very good chemical-explosive
weapons, which they use very
freely on each other. It was last
known to have been raided by a ship
from Excalibur twenty years ago."</p>

<p>"That sounds promising. And the
third planet?"</p>

<p>"Beowulf. We won't take enough
damage on Amaterasu to make any
difference there, but if we saved
Amaterasu for last, we might be
needing too many repairs."</p>

<p>"It's like that?"</p>

<p>"Yes. They have nuclear energy. I
don't think it would be wise to mention
Beowulf to Captains Spasso and
Valkanhayn. Wait till we've hit Khepera
and Amaterasu. They may be
feeling like heroes, then."</p>




<!--se:split--><h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XI</h2>


<p>Khepera left a bad taste in Trask's
mouth. He was still tasting it when
the colored turbulence died out of
the screen and left the gray nothingness
of hyperspace. Garvan Spasso&mdash;they
had had no trouble in inducing
him to come along&mdash;was staring
avidly at the screen as though he
could still see the ravished planet
they had left.</p>

<p>"That was a good one; that was a
good one!" he was crowing. He'd said
that a dozen times since they had
lifted out. "Three cities in five days,
and all the stuff we gathered up
around them. We took over two million
stellars."</p>

<p>And did ten times as much damage
getting it, and there was no scale
of values by which to compute the
death and suffering.</p>

<p>"Knock it off, Spasso. You said
that before."</p>

<p>There was a time when he wouldn't
have spoken to the fellow, or anybody
else, like that. Gresham's law,
extended: Bad manners drive out
good manners. Spasso turned on him
indignantly.</p>

<p>"Who do you think you are&mdash;?"</p>

<p>"He thinks he's Lord Trask of
Tanith," Harkaman said. "He's right,
too; he is." He looked searchingly at
Trask for a moment, then turned
back to Spasso. "I'm just as tired as
he is of hearing you pop your mouth
about a lousy two million stellars.
Nearer a million and a half, but two
million's nothing to pop about. Maybe
it would be for the <i>Lamia</i>, but we
have a three-ship fleet and a planetary
base to meet expenses on. Out
of this raid, a ground-fighter or an
able spaceman will get a hundred and
fifty stellars. We'll get about a thousand,
ourselves. How long do you
think we can stay in business doing
this kind of chicken-stealing."</p>

<p>"You call this chicken-stealing?"</p>

<p>"I call it chicken-stealing, and so'll
you before we get back to Tanith. If
you live that long."</p>

<p>For a moment, Spasso was still affronted.
Then, temporarily, his vulpine
face showed avaricious hope,
and then apprehension. Evidently he
knew Otto Harkaman's reputation,
and some of the things Harkaman had
done weren't his idea of an easy way
to make money.</p>

<p>Khepera had been easy; the locals
hadn't had anything to fight with.
Small arms, and light cannon which
hadn't been able to fire more than a
few rounds. Wherever they had attempted
resistance, the combat cars
had swooped in, dropping bombs and
firing machine guns and auto-cannon.
Yet they had fought, bitterly and
hopelessly&mdash;just as he would have,
defending Traskon.</p>

<p>Trask busied himself getting coffee
and a cigarette from one of the robots.
When he looked up, Spasso had
gone away, and Harkaman was sitting
on the edge of the desk, loading
his short pipe.</p>

<p>"Well, you saw the elephant, Lucas,"
Harkaman said. "You don't seem
to have liked it."</p>

<p>"Elephant?"</p>

<p>"Old Terran expression I read
somewhere. All I know is that an
elephant was an animal about the
size of one of your Gram megatheres.
The expression means, experiencing
something for the first time which
makes a great impression. Elephants
must have been something to see.
This was your first Viking raid.
You've seen it, now."</p>

<p>He'd been in combat before; he'd
led the fighting-men of Traskon during
the boundary dispute with Baron
Manniwel, and there were always
bandits and cattle rustlers. He'd
thought it would be like that. He remembered,
five days, or was it five
ages, ago, his excited anticipation as
the city grew and spread in the screen
and the <i>Nemesis</i> came dropping
down toward it. The pinnaces, his
four and the two from the <i>Space
Scourge</i>, had gone spiraling out a
hundred miles beyond the city; the
<i>Space Scourge</i> had gone into a tighter
circle twenty miles from its center;
the <i>Nemesis</i> had continued her
relentless descent until she was ten
miles from the ground, before she
began spewing out landing craft, and
combat cars, and the little egg-shaped
one-man air-cavalry mounts. It had
been thrilling. Everything had gone
perfectly; not even Valkanhayn's
gang had goofed.</p>

<p>Then the screenviews had begun
coming in. The brief and hopeless
fight in the city. He could still see
that silly little field gun, it must have
been around seventy or eighty millimeter,
on a high-wheeled carriage,
drawn by six shaggy, bandy-legged
beasts. They had gotten it unlimbered
and were trying to get it on a target
when a rocket from an aircar landed
directly under the muzzle. Gun,
caisson, crew, even the draft team
fifty yards behind, had simply vanished.</p>

<p>Or the little company, some of
them women, trying to defend the
top of a tall and half-ruinous building
with rifles and pistols. One air-cavalryman
wiped them all out with
his machine guns.</p>

<p>"They don't have a chance," he'd
said, half-sick. "But they keep on
fighting."</p>

<p>"Yes; stupid of them, isn't it?"
Harkaman, beside him, had said.</p>

<p>"What would you do in their
place?"</p>

<p>"Fight. Try to kill as many Space
Vikings as I could before they got
me. Terro-humans are all stupid like
that. That's why we're human."</p>


<p>If the taking of the city had been
a massacre, the sack that had followed
had been a man-made Hell. He had
gone down, along with Harkaman,
while the fighting, if it could be so
called, was still going on. Harkaman
had suggested that the men ought to
see him moving about among them;
for his own part, he had felt a compulsion
to share their guilt.</p>

<p>He and Sir Paytrik Morland had
been on foot together in one of the
big hollow buildings that had stood
since Khepera had been a Member
Republic of the Terran Federation.
The air was acrid with smoke, powder
smoke and the smoke of burning.
It was surprising, how much would
burn, in this city of concrete and
vitrified stone. It was surprising, too,
how well-kept everything was, at least
on the ground level. These people
had taken pride in their city.</p>

<p>They found themselves alone, in a
great empty hallway; the noise and
horror of the sack had moved away
from them, or they from it, and then,
when they entered a side hall, they
saw a man, one of the locals, squatting
on the floor with the body of a
woman cradled on his lap. She was
dead, half her head had been blown
off, but he was clasping her tightly,
her blood staining his shirt, and sobbing
heartbrokenly. A carbine lay
forgotten on the floor beside him.</p>

<p>"Poor devil," Morland said, and
started forward.</p>

<p>"No."</p>

<p>Trask stopped him with his left
hand. With his right, he drew his
pistol and shot the man dead. Morland
was horrified.</p>

<p>"Great Satan, Lucas! Why did you
do that?"</p>

<p>"I wish Andray Dunnan had done
that for me." He thumbed the safety
on and holstered the pistol. "None of
this would be happening if he had.
How many more happinesses do you
think we've smashed here today? And
we don't even have Dunnan's excuse
of madness."</p>

<p>The next morning, with everything
of value collected and sent aboard,
they had started cross-country for five
hundred miles to another city, the
first hundred over a countryside
asmoke from burning villages Valkanhayn's
men had pillaged the night
before. There was no warning; Khepera
had lost electricity and radio
and telegraph, and the spread of
news was at the speed of one of the
beasts the locals insisted on calling
horses. By midafternoon, they had
finished with that city. It had been as
bad as the first one.</p>

<p>One thing, it was the center of a
considerable cattle country. The cattle
were native to the planet, heavy-bodied
unicorns the size of a Gram
bisonoid or one of the slightly mutated
Terran carabaos on Tanith, with
long hair like a Terran yak. He had
detailed a dozen of the <i>Nemesis</i>
ground-fighters who had been vaqueros
on his Traskon ranches to
collect a score of cows and four likely
bulls, with enough fodder to last
them on the voyage. The odds were
strongly against any of them living
to acclimate themselves to Tanith,
but if they did, they might prove to
be one of the most valuable pieces of
loot from Khepera.</p>

<p>The third city was at the forks of
a river, like Tradetown on Tanith.
Unlike it, this was a real metropolis.
They should have gone there first of
all. They spent two days systematically
pillaging it. The Kheperans carried
on considerable river-traffic,
with stern-wheel steamboats, and the
waterfront was lined with warehouses
crammed with every sort of
merchandise. Even better, the Kheperans
had money, and for the most
part it was gold specie, and the bank
vaults were full of it.</p>

<p>Unfortunately, the city had been
built since the fall of the Federation
and the climb up from the barbarism
that had followed, and a great deal of
it was of wood. Fires started almost
at once, and it was almost completely
on fire by the end of the second day.
It had been visible in the telescopic
screen even after they were out of
atmosphere, a black smear until the
turning planet carried it into darkness
and then a lurid glow.</p>

<hr/>

<p>"It was a filthy business."</p>

<p>Harkaman nodded. "Robbery and
murder always are. You don't have to
ask me who said that Space Vikings
are professional robbers and murderers,
but who was it said that he didn't
care how many planets were raided
and how many innocents massacred
in the Old Federation?"</p>

<p>"A dead man. Lucas Trask of
Traskon."</p>

<p>"You wish, now, that you'd kept
Traskon and stayed on Gram?"</p>

<p>"No. If I had, I'd have spent every
hour wishing I was doing what I'm
doing now. I can get used to this, I
suppose."</p>

<p>"I think you will. At least, you
kept your rations down. I didn't on
my first raid, and had bad dreams
about it for a year." He gave his
coffee cup back to the robot and got
to his feet. "Get a little rest, for a
couple of hours. Then draw some
alcodote-vitamin pills from the medic.
As soon as things are secured,
there'll be parties all over the ship,
and we'll be expected to look in on
every one of them, have a drink, and
say 'Well done, boys.'"</p>

<hr/>

<p>Elaine came to him, while he was
resting. She looked at him in horror,
and he tried to hide his face from her,
and then realized that he was trying
to hide it from himself.</p>




<!--se:split--><h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XII</h2>


<p>They came straight down on Eglonsby,
on Amaterasu, the <i>Nemesis</i>
and the <i>Space Scourge</i> side by side.
The radar had picked them up at
point-five light-seconds; by this time
the whole planet knew they were
coming, and nobody was wondering
why. Paul Koreff was monitoring at
least twenty radio stations, assigning
somebody to each one as it was identified.
What was coming in was uniformly
excited, some panicky, and all
in fairly standard Lingua Terra.</p>

<p>Garvan Spasso was perturbed. So,
in the communication screen from
the <i>Space Scourge</i>, was Boake
Valkanhayn.</p>

<p>"They got radio, and they got
radar," he clamored.</p>

<p>"Well, so what?" Harkaman asked.
"They had radio and radar twenty
years ago, when Rock Morgan was
here in the <i>Coalsack</i>. But they don't
have nuclear energy, do they?"</p>

<p>"Well, no. I'm picking up a lot of
industrial electrical discharge, but
nothing nuclear."</p>

<p>"All right. A man with a club can
lick a man with his fists. A man with
a gun can lick half a dozen with
clubs. And two ships with nuclear
weapons can lick a whole planet
without them. Think it's time,
Lucas?"</p>

<p>He nodded. "Paul, can you cut in
on that Eglonsby station yet?"</p>

<p>"What are you going to do?"
Valkanhayn wanted to know, against it
in advance.</p>

<p>"Summon them to surrender. If
they don't, we will drop a hellburner,
and then we will pick out another
city and summon it to surrender. I
don't think the second one will refuse.
If we are going to be murderers,
we'll do it right, this time."</p>

<p>Valkanhayn was aghast, probably
at the idea of burning an unlooted
city. Spasso was sputtering something
about, "... Teach the dirty
Neobarbs a lesson&mdash;" Koreff told him
he was switched on. He picked up a
hand-phone.</p>

<p>"Space Vikings <i>Nemesis</i> and <i>Space
Scourge</i>, calling the city of Eglonsby.
Space Vikings...."</p>

<p>He repeated it for over a minute;
there was no reply.</p>

<p>"Vann," he called Guns-and-Missiles.
"A subcrit display job, about
four miles over the city."</p>

<p>He laid the phone down and
looked to the underside viewscreen.
A little later, a silvery shape dropped
away from the ship's south pole. The
telescopic screen went off, and the
unmagnified screen darkened as the
filters went on. Valkanhayn, aboard
the other ship, was shouting a warning
about his own screens. The only
unfiltered screen aboard the <i>Nemesis</i>
was the one tuned to the falling missile.
The city of Eglonsby rushed upward
in it, and then it went suddenly
dark. There was an orange-yellow
blaze in the other screens. After a
while, the filters went off and the
telescopic screen went on again. He
picked up the phone.</p>

<p>"Space Vikings calling Eglonsby;
this is your last warning. Communicate
at once."</p>

<p>Less than a minute later, a voice
came out of one of the speakers:</p>

<p>"Eglonsby calling Space Vikings.
Your bomb has done great damage.
Will you hold your fire until somebody
in authority can communicate
with you? This is the chief operator
at the central State telecast station; I
have no authority to say anything to
you, or discuss anything."</p>

<p>"Oh, good, that sounds like a dictatorship,"
Harkaman was saying.
"Grab the dictator and shove a pistol
in his face and you have everything."</p>

<p>"There is nothing to discuss. Get
somebody who has authority to surrender
the city to us. If this is not
done within the hour, the city and
everybody in it will be obliterated."</p>

<p>Only minutes later, a new voice
said:</p>

<p>"This is Gunsalis Jan, secretary to
Pedrosan Pedro, President of the
Council of Syndics. We will switch
President Pedrosan over as soon as he
can speak directly to the personage
in supreme command of your ships."</p>

<p>"That is myself; switch him to me
at once."</p>

<p>After a delay of less than fifteen
seconds they had President Pedrosan
Pedro.</p>

<p>"We are prepared to resist, but we
realize what this would cost in lives
and destruction of property," he began.</p>

<p>"You don't begin to. Do you know
anything about nuclear weapons?"</p>

<p>"From history; we have no nuclear
power of any sort. We can find no
fissionables on this planet."</p>

<p>"The cost, as you put it, would be
everything and everybody in Eglonsby
and for a radius of almost a hundred miles.
Are you still prepared to
resist?"</p>

<p>The President of the Council of
Syndics wasn't and said so. Trask
asked him how much authority his
position gave him.</p>

<p>"I have all powers in any emergency.
I think," the voice added
tonelessly, "that this is an emergency.
The council will automatically ratify
any decision I make."</p>

<p>Harkaman depressed a button in
front of him. "What I said; dictatorship,
with parliamentary false front."</p>

<p>"If he isn't a false-front dictator
for some oligarchy." He motioned to
Harkaman to take his thumb off the
button. "How large is this Council?"</p>

<p>"Sixteen, elected by the Syndicates
they represent. There is the Syndicate
of Labor, the Syndicate of Manufacturers,
the Syndicate of Small Businesses, the...."</p>

<p>"Corporate State, First Century
Pre-Atomic on Terra. Benny the
Moose," Harkaman said. "Let's all go
down and talk to them."</p>

<hr/>

<p>When they were sure that the public
had been warned to make no resistance,
the <i>Nemesis</i> went down to
two miles, bulking over the center of
the city. The buildings were low by
the standards of a contragravity-using
people, the highest barely a thousand
feet and few over five hundred, and
they were more closely set than
Sword-Worlders were accustomed to,
with broad roadways between. In several
places there were queer arrangements
of crossed roadways, apparently
leading nowhere. Harkaman
laughed when he saw them.</p>

<p>"Airstrips. I've seen them on other
planets where they've lost contragravity.
For winged aircraft powered
by chemical fuel. I hope we have
time for me to look around, here. I'll
bet they even have railroads here."</p>

<p>The "great damage" caused by the
bomb was about equal to the effect
of a medium hurricane; he had seen
worse from high winds at Traskon.
Mostly it had been moral, which had
been the kind intended.</p>

<p>They met President Pedrosan and
the council of Syndics in a spacious
and well-furnished chamber near the
top of one of the medium-high buildings.
Valkanhayn was surprised; in a
loud aside he considered that these
people must be almost civilized. They
were introduced. Amaterasuan surnames
preceded personal names,
which hinted at a culture and a political
organization making much use
of registration by alphabetical list.
They all wore garments which had
the indefinable but unmistakable appearance
of uniforms. When they
had all seated themselves at a large
oval table, Harkaman drew his pistol
and used the butt for a gavel.</p>

<p>"Lord Trask, will you deal with
these people directly?" he asked,
stiffly formal.</p>

<p>"Certainly, Admiral." He spoke to
the President, ignoring the others.
"We want it understood that we control
this city, and we expect complete submission.
As long as you remain
submissive to us, we will do no
damage beyond removal of the things
we wish to take from it, and there
will be no violence to any of your
people, or any indiscriminate vandalism.
This visit we are paying you will
cost you heavily, make no mistake
about that, but whatever the cost, it
will be a cheap price for avoiding
what we might otherwise do."</p>

<p>The President and the Syndics exchanged
relieved glances. Let the
taxpayers worry about the cost; they'd
come out of it with whole skins.</p>

<p>"You understand, we want maximum
value and minimum bulk," he
continued. "Jewels, objects of art,
furs, the better grades of luxury
goods of all kinds. Rare-element
metals. And monetary metals, gold
and platinum. You have a metallic-based
currency, I suppose?"</p>

<p>"Oh, no!" President Pedrosan was
slightly scandalized. "Our currency is
based on services to society. Our
monetary unit is simply called a
credit."</p>

<p>Harkaman snorted impolitely. Evidently
he'd seen economic systems
like that before. Trask wanted to
know if they used gold or platinum
at all.</p>

<p>"Gold, to some extent, for jewelry."
Evidently they weren't complete
economic puritans. "And platinum in
industry, of course."</p>

<p>"If they want gold, they should
have raided Stolgoland," one of the
Syndics said. "They have a gold-standard
currency." From the way he
said it, he might have been accusing
them of eating with their fingers, and
possibly of eating their own young.</p>

<p>"I know, the maps we're using for
this planet are a few centuries old;
Stolgoland doesn't seem to appear on
them."</p>

<p>"I wish it didn't appear on ours,
either." That was General Dagr&oacute;
Ector, Syndic for State Protection.</p>

<p>"It would have been a good thing
for this whole planet if you'd decided
to raid them instead of us," somebody
else said.</p>

<p>"It isn't too late for these gentlemen
to make that decision," Pedrosan
said. "I gather that gold is a monetary
metal among your people?"
When Trask nodded, he continued:
"It is also the basis of the Stolgonian
currency. The actual currency is paper,
theoretically redeemable in gold.
In actuality, the circulation of gold
has been prohibited, and the entire
gold wealth of the nation is concentrated
in vaults at three depositories.
We know exactly where they are."</p>

<p>"You begin to interest me, President
Pedrosan."</p>

<p>"I do? Well, you have two large
spaceships and six smaller craft. You
have nuclear weapons, something nobody
on this planet has. You have
contragravity, something that is hardly
more than a legend here. On the
other hand, we have a million and a
half ground-troops, jet aircraft, armored
ground-vehicles, and chemical
weapons. If you will undertake to attack
Stolgoland, we will place this
entire force at your disposal; General
Dagr&oacute; will command them as you
direct. All that we ask is that, when
you have loaded the gold hoards of
Stolgoland aboard your ships, you
will leave our troops in possession of
the country."</p>

<hr/>

<p>That was all there was to that
meeting. There was a second one;
only Trask, Harkaman and Sir Paytrik
Morland represented the Space
Vikings, and the Eglonsby government
was represented by President
Pedrosan and General Dagr&oacute;. They
met more intimately, in a smaller and
more luxurious room in the same
building.</p>

<p>"If you're going to declare war on
Stolgoland, you'd better get along
with it," Morland advised.</p>

<p>"What?" Pedrosan seemed to have
only the vaguest idea of what he was
talking about. "You mean, warn
them? Certainly not. We will attack
them by surprise. It will be nothing
but plain self-defense," he added
righteously. "The oligarchic capitalists
of Stolgoland have been plotting
to attack us for years."</p>

<p>"Yes. If you had carried out your
original intention of looting Eglonsby,
they would have invaded us the
moment your ships lifted out. It's
exactly what I'd do in their place."</p>

<p>"But you maintain nominally
friendly relations with them?"</p>

<p>"Of course. We are civilized. The
peace-loving government and people
of Eglonsby...."</p>

<p>"Yes, Mr. President; I understand.
And they have an embassy here?"</p>

<p>"They call it that!" cried Dagr&oacute;.
"It is a nest of vipers, a plague-spot
of espionage and subversion ...!"</p>

<p>"We'll grab that ourselves, right
away," Harkaman said. "You won't be
able to round up all their agents outside
it, and if we tried to, it would
cause suspicion. We'll have to put up
a front to deceive them."</p>

<p>"Yes. You will go on the air at
once, calling on the people to collaborate
with us, and you will specifically
order your troops mobilized to
assist us in collecting the tribute we
are levying on Eglonsby," Trask said.
"In that way, if any Stolgonian spies
see your troops concentrated around
our landing craft, they'll think it's to
help us load our loot."</p>

<p>"And we'll announce that a large
part of the tribute will consist of
military equipment," Dagr&oacute; added.
"That will explain why our guns and
tanks are being loaded on your contragravity
vehicles."</p>

<hr/>

<p>When the Stolgonian embassy was
seized by the Space Vikings, the ambassador
asked to be taken at once to
their leader. He had a proposition:
If the Space Vikings would completely
disable the army of Eglonsby
and admit Stolgonian troops when
they were ready to leave, the invaders
would bring with them ten thousand
kilos of gold. Trask affected to
be very hospitable to the offer.</p>

<p>Stolgoland lay across a narrow and
shallow sea from the State of Eglonsby;
it was dotted with islands, and
every one of them was, in turn, dotted
with oil wells. Petroleum was what
kept the aircraft and ground-vehicles
of Amaterasu in operation; oil, rather
than ideology, was at the root of
the enmity between the two nations.
Apparently the Stolgonian espionage
in Eglonsby was completely deceived,
and the reports Trask allowed
the captive ambassador to
make confirmed the deception.
Hourly the Eglonsby radio stations
poured out exhortations to the people
to co-operate with the Space
Vikings, with an occasional lamentation
about the masses of war materials
being taken. Eglonsby espionage
in Stolgoland was similarly active.
The Stolgonian armies were being
massed at four seaports on the coast
facing Eglonsby, and there was a
frantic gathering of every sort of ship
available. By this time, any sympathy
that Trask might have felt for
either party had evaporated.</p>

<p>The invasion of Stolgoland started
the fifth morning after their arrival
over Eglonsby. Before dawn, the six
pinnaces went in, making a wide
sweep around the curvature of the
planet and coming in from the
north, two to each of the three gold-troves.
They were detected by radar,
eventually but too late for any effective
resistance to be organized. Two
were even taken without a shot; by
mid-morning all three had been
blown open and the ingots and specie
were being removed.</p>

<p>The four seaports from whence
the Stolgonian invasion of Eglonsby
was to have been launched were neutralized
by nuclear bombing. Neutralized
was a nice word, Trask
thought; there was no echo in it of
the screams of the still-living,
maimed and burned and blinded,
around the fringes of ground-zero.
The <i>Nemesis</i> and the <i>Space Scourge</i>,
from landing craft and from the
ships themselves, landed Eglonsby
troops on Stolgonopolis. While they
were sacking the city, with all the
usual atrocities, the Space Vikings
were loading the gold, and anything
else that was of more than ordinary
value, aboard the ships.</p>

<hr/>

<p>They were still at it the next morning
when President Pedrosan arrived
at the newly conquered capital,
announcing his intention of putting
the Stolgonian chief of state and his
cabinet on trial as war criminals.
Before sunset, they were back over
Eglonsby. The loot might run as
high as a half-billion Excalibur stellars.
Boake Valkanhayn and Garvan
Spasso were simply beyond astonishment
and beyond words.</p>

<p>The looting of Eglonsby then began.</p>

<p>They gathered up machinery, and
stocks of steel and light-metal alloys.
The city was full of warehouses,
and the warehouses were
crammed with valuables. In spite of
the socialistic and egalitarian verbiage
behind which the government
operated, there seemed to be a numerous
elite class and if gold were
not a monetary metal it was not despised
for purposes of ostentation.
There were several large art museums.
Vann Larch, their nearest approach
to an art specialist, took
charge of culling the best from them.</p>

<p>And there was a vast public library.
Into this Otto Harkaman vanished,
with half a dozen men and a
contragravity scow. Its historical section
would be much poorer in the
future.</p>

<p>President Pedrosan Pedro was on
the radio from Stolgonopolis that
night.</p>

<p>"Is this how you Space Vikings
keep faith?" he demanded indignantly.
"You've abandoned me and
my army here in Stolgoland, and
you're sacking Eglonsby. You promised
to leave Eglonsby alone if I
helped you get the gold of Stolgoland."</p>

<p>"I promised nothing of the kind.
I promised to help you take Stolgoland.
You've taken it," Trask told
him. "I promised to avoid unnecessary
damage or violence. I've already
hanged a dozen of my own men for
rape, murder and wanton vandalism.
Now, we expect to be out of here in
twenty-four hours. You'd better be
back here before then. Your own
people are starting to loot. We did
not promise to control them for
you."</p>

<p>That was true. What few troops
had been left behind, and the police,
were unable to cope with the mobs
that were pillaging in the wake of
the Space Vikings. Everybody
seemed to be trying to grab what he
could and let the Vikings be blamed
for it. He had been able to keep his
own people in order. There had been
at least a dozen cases of rape and
wanton murder, and the offenders
had been promptly hanged. None of
their shipmates, not even the <i>Space
Scourge</i> company, seemed resentful.
They felt the culprits had deserved
what they'd gotten; not for what
they'd done to the locals, but for disobeying
orders.</p>

<p>A few troops had been flown in
from Stolgoland by the time they had
gotten their vehicles stowed and
were lifting out. They didn't seem to
be making much headway. Harkaman,
who had gotten his load of
microbooks stowed and was at the
command desk, laughed heartily.</p>

<p>"I don't know what Pedrosan'll
do. Gehenna, I don't even know
what I'd do, if I'd gotten myself into
a mess like that. He'll probably bring
half his army back, leave the other
half in Stolgoland, and lose both.
Suppose we drop in, in about three
or four years, just out of curiosity. If
we make twenty per cent of what we
did this time, the trip would pay for
itself."</p>

<p>After they went into hyperspace
and had the ship secured, the parties
lasted three Galactic standard days,
and nobody was at all sober. Harkaman
was drooling over the mass of
historical material he had found.
Spasso was jubilant. Nobody could
call this chicken-stealing. He kept
repeating that as long as he was able
to say anything. Khepera, he conceded,
had been. Lousy two or three
million stellars; poo!</p>




<!--se:split--><h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XIII</h2>


<p>Beowulf was bad.</p>

<p>Valkanhayn and Spasso had both
been opposed to the raid. Nobody
raided Beowulf; Beowulf was too
tough. Beowulf had nuclear energy
and nuclear weapons and contragravity
and normal-space craft, they even
had colonies on a couple of other
planets of their system. They had
everything but hyperdrive. Beowulf
was a civilized planet, and you didn't
raid civilized planets, not and get
away with it.</p>

<p>And beside, hadn't they gotten
enough loot on Amaterasu?</p>

<p>"No, we did not," Trask told them.
"If we're going to make anything out
of Tanith, we're going to need power,
and I don't mean windmills and
waterwheels. As you've remarked,
Beowulf has nuclear energy. That's
where we get our plutonium and our
power units."</p>

<p>So they went to Beowulf. They
came out of hyperspace eight light-hours
from the F-7 star of which
Beowulf was the fourth planet, and
twenty light-minutes apart. Guatt
Kirbey made a microjump that
brought the ships within practical
communicating distance, and they
began making plans in an intership
screen conference.</p>

<p>"There are, or were, three chief
sources of fissionable ores," Harkaman
said. "The last ship to raid here
and get away was Stefan Kintour's
<i>Princess of Lyonesse</i>, sixty years ago.
He hit one on the Antarctic continent;
according to his account, everything
there was fairly new. He didn't
mess things up too badly, and it
ought to be still operating. We'll go
in from the south pole, and we'll
have to go in fast."</p>

<p>They shifted personnel and equipment.
They would go in bunched,
the pinnaces ahead; they and the
<i>Space Scourge</i> would go down to the
ground, while the better-armed <i>Nemesis</i>
would hover above to fight off
local contragravity, shoot down missiles,
and generally provide overhead
cover. Trask transferred to the <i>Space
Scourge</i>, taking with him Morland
and two hundred of the <i>Nemesis</i>
ground-fighters. Most of the single-mounts,
landing craft and manipulators
and heavy-duty lifters went with
him, jamming the decks around the
vehicle ports of Valkanhayn's ship.</p>

<p>They jumped in to six light-minutes,
and while Valkanhayn's astrogator
was still fiddling with his controls
they began sensing radar and
microray detection. When they came
out again, they were two light-seconds
off the south pole, and half a
dozen ships were either in orbit or
coming up from the planet. All normal-space
craft, of course, but some
were almost as big as the <i>Nemesis</i>.</p>

<p>From there on, it was a nightmare.</p>

<p>Ships pounded at them with guns,
and they pounded back. Missiles
went out, and counter-missiles
stopped them in rapidly expanding
and quickly vanishing globes of light.
Red lights flashed on the damage
board, and sirens howled and klaxons
squawked. In the outside-view
screens, they saw the <i>Nemesis</i> vanish
in a blaze of radiance, and then,
while their hearts were still in their
throats, come out of it again. Red
lights went off on the board as damage-control
crews and their robots
sealed the breaches in the hull and
pumped air back into evacuated
areas, and then more red lights came
on.</p>

<p>Occasionally, he would glance toward
Boake Valkanhayn, who sat motionless
in his chair, chewing a cigar
that had gone out long ago. He
wasn't enjoying it, but he wasn't
showing fear. Once a Beowulfer vanished
in a supernova flash, and when
the ball of incandescence widened to
nothing the ship was gone. All Valkanhayn
said was: "Hope one of our
boys did that."</p>

<p>They fought their way in and
down, toward the atmosphere. Another
Beowulf ship blew up, a craft
about the size of Spasso's <i>Lamia</i>. A
moment later, another; Valkanhayn
was pounding the desk in front of
him with his fist and yelling: "That
was one of ours! Find out who
launched it; get his name!"</p>

<p>Missiles were coming up from the
planet, now. Valkanhayn's detection
officer was trying to locate the
source. While he was trying, a big
melon-shaped thing fell away from
the <i>Nemesis</i>, and in the jiggling,
radiation-distorted intership screen
Harkaman's image was laughing.</p>

<p>"Hellburner just went off; target
about 50&deg; south, 25&deg; east of the sunrise
line. That's where those missiles
are coming from."</p>

<p>Counter-missiles sped toward the
big metal melon; defense missiles,
robot-launched, met them. The hellburner's
track was marked first by
expanding red and orange globes in
airless space and then by fire-puffs
after it entered atmosphere. It vanished
into the darkness beyond the
sunset, and then made sunlight of its
own. It <i>was</i> sunlight; a Bethe solar-phoenix
reaction, and it would sustain
itself for hours. He hoped it
hadn't landed within a thousand
miles of their objective.</p>



<p>The ground operation was a nightmare
of a different sort. He went
down in a command car, with Paytrik
Morland and a couple of others.
There were missiles and gun batteries.
There were darting patterns
of flights of combat vehicles, blazing
gunfire, and single vehicles that shot
past or blew up in front of them.
Robots on contragravity&mdash;military
robots, with missiles to launch, and
working robots with only their own
mass to hurl, flung themselves mindlessly
at them. Screens that went
crazy from radiation; speakers that
jabbered contradictory orders. Finally,
the battle, which had raged in the
air over two thousand square miles of
mines and refineries and reaction
plants, became two distinct and concentrated
battles, one at the packing
plant and storage vaults and one at
the power-unit cartridge factory.</p>

<p>Three pinnaces came down to
form a triangle over each; the <i>Space
Scourge</i> hung midway between,
poured out a swarm of vehicles and
big claw-armed manipulators; armored
lighters and landing craft
shuttled back and forth. The command
car looped and dodged from
one target to the other; at one, keg-like
canisters of plutonium, collapsium-plated
and weighing tons
apiece, were coming out of the
vaults, and at the other lifters were
bringing out loads of nuclear-electric
power-unit cartridges, some as big
as a ten liter jar, to power a spaceship
engine, and some small as a
round of pistol ammunition, for
things like flashlights.</p>

<p>Every hour or so, he looked at his
watch, and it would be three or four
minutes later.</p>

<p>At last, when he was completely
convinced that he had really been
killed, and was damned and would
spend all eternity in this fire-riven
chaos, the <i>Nemesis</i> began firing red
flares and the speakers in all the vehicles
were signaling recall. He got
aboard the <i>Space Scourge</i> somehow,
after assuring himself that nobody
who was alive was left behind.</p>

<p>There were twenty-odd who
weren't, and the sick bay was full of
wounded who had gone up with
cargo, and more were being helped
off the vehicles as they were berthed.
The car in which he had been riding
had been hit several times, and one
of the gunners was bleeding under
his helmet and didn't seem aware of
it. When he got to the command
room, he found Boake Valkanhayn,
his face drawn and weary, getting
coffee from a robot and lacing it with
brandy.</p>

<p>"That's it," he said, blowing on the
steaming cup. It was the battered
silver one that had been in front of
him when he had first appeared in
the <i>Nemesis'</i> screen. He nodded toward
the damage screen; everything
had been patched up, or the outer
decks around breached portions of
the hull sealed. "Ship secure." He set
down the silver mug and lit a cigar.
"To quote Garvan Spasso, 'Nobody
can call that chicken-stealing.'"</p>

<p>"No. Not even if you count Tizona
giraffe-birds as chickens. That
Gram gum-pear brandy you're putting
in that coffee? I'll have the
same. Just leave out the coffee."</p>




<!--se:split--><h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XIV</h2>


<p>The <i>Lamia</i>'s detection picked them
up as soon as they were out of the
last microjump; Trask's gnawing
fear that Dunnan might attack in
their absence had been groundless.
Incredibly, he realized, they had been
gone only thirty-odd Galactic Standard
days, and in that time Alvyn
Karffard had done an incredible
amount of work.</p>

<p>He had gotten the spaceport completely
cleared of rubble and debris,
and he had the woods cleared away
from around it and the two tall
buildings. The locals called the city
Rivvin; a few inscriptions found
here and there in it indicated that
the original name had been Rivington.
He had done considerable mapping,
in some detail of the continent
on which it was located and, in general,
of the rest of the planet. And he
had established friendly relations
with the people of Tradetown and
made friends with their king.</p>

<p>Nobody, not even those who had
collected it, quite believed their eyes
when the loot was unloaded. The little
herd of long haired unicorns&mdash;the
Khepera locals had called them
kreggs, probably a corruption of the
name of some naturalist who had
first studied them&mdash;had come
through the voyage and even the
Battle of Beowulf in good shape.
Trask and a few of his former cattlemen
from Traskon watched them
anxiously, and the ship's doctor, acting
veterinarian, made elaborate tests
of vegetation they would be likely to
eat. Three of the cows proved to be
with calf; these were isolated and
watched over with especial solicitude.

</p>

<hr/>

<p>The locals were inclined to take a
poor view of the kreggs, at first.
Cattle ought to have two horns, one
on either side, curved back. It wasn't
right for cattle to have only one
horn, in the middle, slanting forward.</p>

<p>Both ships had taken heavy damage.
The <i>Nemesis</i> had one pinnace
berth knocked open, and everybody
was glad the Beowulfers hadn't noticed
that and gotten a missile inside.
The <i>Space Scourge</i> had taken a
hit directly on her south pole while
lifting out from the planet, and a
good deal of the southern part of the
ship was sealed off when she came in.
The <i>Nemesis</i> was repaired as far as
possible and put on off-planet patrol,
then they went to work on the
<i>Space Scourge</i>, transferring much of
her armament to ground defense,
clearing out all the available cargo
space, and repairing her hull as far as
possible. To repair her completely
was a job for a regular shipyard, like
Alex Gorram's on Gram. And that
was where the work would be done.</p>

<p>Boake Valkanhayn would command
her on the voyage to and from
Gram. Since Beowulf, Trask had not
only ceased to dislike the man, but
was beginning to admire him. He
had been a good man once, before ill
fortune which had been only partly
of his own making had overtaken
him. He'd just let himself go and
stopped caring. Now he had taken
hold of himself again. It had started
showing after they had landed on
Amaterasu. He had begun to dress
more neatly and speak more grammatically;
to look and act more like
a spaceman and less like a barfly.
His men had begun to jump to obey
when he gave an order. He had opposed
the raid on Beowulf, but that
had been the dying struggle of the
chicken-thief he had been. He had
been scared, going in; well, who
hadn't been, except a few greenhorns
brave with the valor of ignorance.
But he had gone in, and
fought his ship well, and had held
his station over the fissionables plant
in a hell of bombs and missile, and
he had made sure everybody who had
gone down and who was still alive
was aboard before he lifted out.</p>

<p>He was a Space Viking again.</p>

<p>Garvan Spasso wasn't, and never
would be. He was outraged when he
heard that Valkanhayn would take
his ship, loaded with much of the
loot of the three planets, to Gram.
He came to Trask, fairly spluttering
about it.</p>

<p>"You know what'll happen?" he
demanded. "He'll space out with that
cargo, and that'll be the last any of
us'll hear of him again. He'll probably
take it to Joyeuse or Excalibur
and buy himself a lordship with it."</p>

<p>"Oh, I doubt that, Garvan. A number
of our people are going along&mdash;Guatt
Kirbey will be the astrogator;
you'd trust him, wouldn't you? And
Sir Paytrik Morland, and Baron
Rathmore, and Lord Valpry, and
Rolve Hemmerding...." He was silent
for a moment, struck by an idea.
"Would you be willing to make the
trip in the <i>Space Scourge</i>, too?"</p>

<p>Spasso would, very decidedly.
Trask nodded.</p>

<p>"Good. Then we'll be sure nothing
crooked is pulled," he said seriously.</p>

<p>After Spasso was gone, he got in
touch with Baron Rathmore.</p>

<p>"See to it that he gets as much
money that's due him as possible,
when you get to Gram. And ask
Duke Angus, as a favor to give him
some meaningless position with a
suitably impressive title, Lord Chamberlain
of the Ducal Washroom, or
something. Then he can prime him
with misinformation and give him
an opportunity to sell it to Omfray of
Glaspyth. Then, of course, he could
be contacted to sell Omfray out to
Angus. A couple of times around
and somebody'll stick a knife in him,
and then we'll be rid of him for
good."</p>

<hr/>

<p>They loaded the <i>Space Scourge</i>
with gold from Stolgoland, and
paintings and statues from the art
museums and fabrics and furs and
jewels and porcelains and plate from
the markets of Eglonsby. They loaded
sacks and kegs of specie from Khepera.
Most of the Khepera loot
wasn't worth hauling to Gram, but it
was far enough in advance of their
own technologies to be priceless to
the Tanith locals.</p>

<p>Some of these were learning simple
machine operations, and a few
were able to handle contragravity
vehicles that had been fitted with
adequate safety devices. The former
slave guards had all become sergeants
and lieutenants in an infantry
regiment that had been formed, and
the King of Tradetown borrowed
some to train his own army. Some
genius in the machine shop altered
a matchlock musket to flintlock and
showed the local gunsmiths how to
do it.</p>

<p>The kreggs continued to thrive,
after the <i>Space Scourge</i> departed.
Several calves were born, and seemed
to be doing well; the biochemistry of
Tanith and Khepera were safely
alike. Trask had hopes for them. Every
Viking ship had its own carniculture vats,
but men tired of carniculture meat,
and fresh meat was always
in demand. Some day, he
hoped, kregg-beef would be an item
of sale to ships putting in on Tanith,
and the long-haired hides might even
find a market in the Sword-Worlds.
They had contragravity scows plying
between Rivington and Tradetown
regularly, now, and air-lorries were
linking the villages. The boatmen
of Tradetown rioted occasionally
against this unfair competition. And
in Rivington itself, bulldozers and
power shovels and manipulators labored,
and there was always a rising
cloud of dust over the city.</p>

<p>There was so much to do, and only
a trifle under twenty-five Galactic
Standard hours in a day to do it.
There were whole days in which he
never thought once of Andray Dunnan.</p>

<p>A hundred and twenty-five days to
Gram, and a hundred and twenty-five
days back. They had long ago passed.
Of course, there would be the work
of repairing the <i>Space Scourge</i>, the
conferences with the investors in the
original Tanith Adventure, the business
of gathering the needed equipment
for the new base. Even so, he
was beginning to worry a little. Worry
about something as far out of his
control as the <i>Space Scourge</i> was useless,
he knew. He couldn't help it,
though. Even Harkaman, usually imperturbable,
began to be fretful, after
two hundred and seventy days had
passed.</p>

<p>They were relaxing in the living
quarters they had fitted out at the top
of the spaceport building before retiring,
both sprawled wearily in
chairs that had come from one of the
better hotels of Eglonsby, their
drinks between them on a low table,
the top of which was inlaid with
something that looked like ivory but
wasn't. On the floor beside it lay the
plans for a reaction-plant and mass-energy
converter they would build as
soon as the <i>Space Scourge</i> returned
with equipment for producing collapsium-plated
shielding.</p>

<p>"Of course, we could go ahead
with it, now," Harkaman said. "We
could tear enough armor off the <i>Lamia</i>
to shield any kind of a reaction
plant."</p>

<p>That was the first time either of
them had gotten close to the possibility
that the ship mightn't return.
Trask laid his cigar in the ashtray&mdash;it
had come from President Pedrosan
Pedro's private office&mdash;and splashed
a little more brandy into his glass.</p>

<p>"She'll be coming before long. We
have enough of our people aboard to
make sure nobody else tries to take
the ship. And I really believe, now,
that Valkanhayn can be trusted."</p>

<p>"I do, too. I'm not worried about
what might happen on the ship. But
we don't know what's been happening
on Gram. Glaspyth and Didreksburg
could have teamed up and
jumped Wardshaven before Duke
Angus was ready to invade Glaspyth.
Boake might be landing the ship in
a trap at Wardshaven."</p>

<p>"Be a sorry looking trap after it
closed on him. That would be the
first time in history that a Sword-World
was raided by Space Vikings."
Harkaman looked at his half-empty
glass, then filled it to the top. It was
the same drink he had started with,
just as a regiment that has been decimated
and recruited up to strength
a few times is still the same regiment.</p>

<p>The buzz of the communication
screen&mdash;one of the few things in the
room that hadn't been looted
somewhere&mdash;interrupted him. They both
rose; Harkaman, still carrying his
drink, went to put it on. It was a
man on duty in the control room,
overhead, reporting that two emergences
had just been detected at
twenty light-minutes due north of
the planet. Harkaman gulped his
drink and set down the empty glass.</p>

<p>"All right. You put out a general
alert? Switch anything that comes in
over to this screen." He got out his
pipe and was packing tobacco into it
mechanically. "They'll be out of the
last microjump and about two light-seconds
away in a few minutes."</p>

<p>Trask sat down again, saw that his
cigarette had burned almost to the
tip, and lit a fresh one from it, wishing
he could be as calm about it as
Harkaman. Three minutes later, the
control tower picked up two emergences
at a light-second and a half, a
thousand or so miles apart. Then the
screen flickered, and Boake Valkanhayn
was looking out of it, from the
desk in the newly refurbished command
room of the <i>Space Scourge</i>.</p>

<p>He was a newly refurbished Boake
Valkanhayn, too. His heavily braided
captain's jacket looked like the work
of one of the better tailors on Gram,
and on the breast was a large and
ornate knight's star, of unfamiliar
design, bearing, among other things,
the sword and atom-symbol of the
house of Ward.</p>

<p>"Prince Trask; Count Harkaman,"
he greeted. "<i>Space Scourge</i>, Tanith;
thirty-two hundred hours out of
Wardshaven on Gram, Baron Valkanhayn
commanding, accompanied
by chartered freighter <i>Rozinante</i>,
Durendal, Captain Morbes. Requesting
permission and instructions to
orbit in."</p>

<p>"Baron Valkanhayn?" Harkaman
asked.</p>

<p>"That's right," Valkanhayn
grinned. "And I have a vellum scroll
the size of a blanket to prove it. I
have a whole cargo of scrolls. One
says you're Otto, Count Harkaman,
and another says you're Admiral of
the Royal Navy of Gram."
<!--"Royal Mardukan Navy" in original.--></p>

<p>"He did it!" Trask cried. "He
made himself King of Gram!"</p>

<p>"That's right. And you're his trusty
and well-loved Lucas, Prince Trask,
and Viceroy of his Majesty's Realm
of Tanith."</p>

<p>Harkaman bristled at that. "The
Gehenna you say. This is <i>our</i> Realm
of Tanith."</p>

<p>"Is his Majesty making it worth
while to accept his sovereignty?"
Trask asked. "That is, beside vellum
scrolls?"</p>

<p>Valkanhayn was still grinning.
"Wait till we start sending cargo
down. And wait till you see what's
crammed into the other ship."</p>

<p>"Did Spasso come back with you?"
Harkaman asked.</p>

<p>"Oh, no. Sir Garvan Spasso entered
the service of his Majesty,
King Angus. He is Chief of Police
at Glaspyth, now, and nobody can
call what he's doing there chicken-stealing,
either. Any chickens he
steals, he steals the whole farm to get
them."</p>

<p>That didn't sound good. Spasso
could make King Angus' name stink
all over Glaspyth. Or maybe he'd allow
Spasso to crush the adherents of
Omfray, and then hang him for his
oppression of the people. He'd read
about somebody who'd done something
like that, in one of Harkaman's
Old Terran history books.</p>

<hr/>

<p>Baron Rathmore had stayed on
Gram; so had Rolve Hemmerding.
The rest of the gentlemen-adventurers,
all with shiny new titles of
nobility, had returned. From them,
as the two ships were getting into
orbit, he learned what had happened
on Gram since the <i>Nemesis</i> had
spaced out.</p>

<p>Duke Angus had announced his
intention of carrying on with the
Tanith Adventure, and had started
construction of a new ship at the
Gorram yards. This had served plausibly
to explain all the activities of
preparation for the invasion of
Glaspyth, and had deceived Duke
Omfray completely. Omfray had already
started a ship of his own; the
entire resources of his duchy were
thrown into an effort to get her finished
and to space ahead of the one
Angus was building. Work was going
on frantically on her when the
Wardshaven invaders hit Glaspyth;
she was now nearing completion as a
unit of the Royal Navy. Duke Omfray
had managed to escape to Didreksburg;
when Angus' troops
moved in on the latter duchy, he had
escaped again, this time off-planet.
He was now eating the bitter bread
of exile at the court of his wife's
uncle, the King of Haulteclere.</p>

<p>The Count of Newhaven, the
Duke of Bigglersport, and the Lord
of Northport, all of whom had favored
the establishment of a planetary
monarchy, had immediately acknowledged
Angus as their sovereign.
So, with a knife at his throat,
had the Duke of Didreksburg. Many
other feudal magnates had refused to
surrender their sovereignty. That
might mean fighting, but Paytrik,
now Baron, Morland, doubted it.</p>

<p>"The <i>Space Scourge</i> stopped that,"
he said. "When they heard about the
base here, and saw what we'd shipped
to Gram, they started changing their
minds. Only subjects of King Angus
will be allowed to invest in the Tanith
Adventure."</p>

<p>As for accepting King Angus' annexation
of Tanith and accepting his
sovereignty, that would also be advisable.
They would need a Sword
World outlet for the loot they took
or obtained by barter from other
Space Vikings, and until they had
adequate industries of their own, they
would be dependent on Gram for
many things which could not be gotten
by raiding.</p>

<p>"I suppose the King knows I'm
not out here for my health, or his
profit?" he asked Lord Valpry, during
one of the screen conversations as
the <i>Space Scourge</i> was getting into
orbit. "My business out here is Andray
Dunnan."</p>

<p>"Oh, yes," the Wardshaven noble
replied. "In fact, he told me, in so
many words, that he would be most
happy if you sent him his nephew's
head in a block of lucite. What Dunnan
did touched his honor, too. Sovereign
princes never see any humor
in things like that."</p>

<p>"I suppose he knows that sooner or
later Dunnan will try to attack Tanith?"</p>

<p>"If he doesn't, it isn't because I
didn't tell him often enough. When
you see the defense armament we're
bringing, you'll think he does."</p>

<p>It was impressive, but nothing to
the engineering and industrial equipment.
Mining robots for use on the
iron Moon of Tanith, and normal-space
transports for the fifty thousand
mile run between planet and
satellite. A collapsed-matter producer;
now they could collapsium-plate
their own shielding. A small, fully
robotic, steel mill that could be set
up and operated on the satellite. Industrial
robots, and machinery to
make machinery. And, best of all,
two hundred engineers and highly
skilled technicians.</p>

<p>Quite a few industrial baronies on
Gram would realize, before long,
what they had lost in those men. He
wondered what Lord Trask of Traskon
would have thought about that.</p>

<p>The Prince of Tanith was no longer
interested in what happened to
Gram. Maybe, if things prospered
for the next century or so, his successors
would be ruling Gram by
viceroy from Tanith.</p>




<!--se:split--><h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XV</h2>


<p>As soon as the <i>Space Scourge</i> was
unloaded, she was put on off-planet
watch; Harkaman immediately
spaced out in the <i>Nemesis</i>, while
Trask remained behind. They began
unloading the <i>Rozinante</i>, after setting
her down at Rivington Spaceport.
After that was done, her officers
and crew took a holiday which lasted
a month, until the <i>Nemesis</i> returned.
Harkaman must have made quick
raids on half a dozen planets. None
of the cargo he brought back was
spectacularly valuable, and he dismissed
the whole thing as chicken-stealing,
but he had lost some men
and the ship showed a few fresh
scars. A good deal of what was transshipped
to the <i>Rozinante</i> was manufactured
goods which would compete
with merchandise produced on Gram.</p>

<p>"That load will be a come-down,
after what the <i>Space Scourge</i> took
back, but we didn't want to send the
<i>Rozinante</i> back empty," he said.
"One thing, I had time to do a little
reading, between stops."</p>

<p>"The books from the Eglonsby library?"</p>

<p>"Yes. I learned a curious thing
about Amaterasu. Do you know why
that planet was so extensively colonized
by the Federation, when there
don't seem to be any fissionable ores?
The planet produced gadolinium."</p>

<p>Gadolinium was essential to hyperdrive
engines; the engines of a ship
the size of the <i>Nemesis</i> required
fifty pounds of it. On the Sword-Worlds,
it was worth several times
its weight in gold. If they still mined
it, Amaterasu would repay a second
visit.</p>

<p>When he mentioned it, Harkaman
shrugged. "Why should they mine
it? There's only one thing it's good
for, and you can't run a spaceship on
Diesel oil. I suppose the mines could
be reopened, and new refineries built,
but...."</p>

<p>"We could trade plutonium for
gadolinium. They have none of their
own. We could charge our own
prices for it, and we wouldn't need
to tell them what gadolinium sells
for on the Sword-Worlds."</p>

<p>"We could, if we could do business
with anybody there, after what
we did to Eglonsby and Stolgoland.
Where would we get plutonium?"</p>

<p>"Why do you think the Beowulfers
don't have hyperships, when they
have everything else?"</p>

<p>Harkaman snapped his fingers.
"By Satan, that's it!" Then he looked
at Trask in alarm. "Hey, you're not
thinking of selling Amaterasu plutonium
and Beowulf gadolinium, are
you?"</p>

<p>"Why not? We could make a big
profit on both ends of the deal."</p>

<p>"You know what would happen
next, don't you? There'd be ships
from both planets all over the place
in a few years. We want that like we
want a hole in the head."</p>

<p>He couldn't see the objection. Tanith
and Amaterasu and Beowulf
could work up a very good triangular
trade; all three would profit. It
wouldn't cost men and ship-damage
and ammunition, either. Maybe a
mutual defense alliance, too. Think
about it later; there was too much to
do here on Tanith at present.</p>

<p>There had been mines on the
Moon of Tanith before the collapse
of the Federation; they had been
stripped of their equipment afterward,
while Tanith was still fighting
a rearguard battle against barbarism,
but the underground chambers and
man-made caverns could still be
used, and in time the mines were reopened
and the steel mill put in, and
eventually ingots of finished steel
were coming down by shuttle-craft.
In the meantime, the shipyard had
been laid out and was taking shape.</p>

<p>The Gram ship <i>Queen Flavia</i>&mdash;she
had been the one found unfinished
at Glaspyth&mdash;came in three
months after the <i>Rozinante</i> started
back; she must have been finished
while Valkanhayn was still in hyperspace.
She carried considerable cargo,
some of it superfluous but all of it
useful; everybody was investing in
the Tanith Adventure now, and the
money had to be spent for something.
Better, she brought close to a
thousand men and women; the leakage
of brains and ability from the
Sword-Worlds was turning into a
flood. Among them was Basil Gorram.
Trask remembered him as an
insufferable young twerp, but he
seemed to be a good shipyard man.
He very frankly predicted that in a
few years his father's yards at Wardshaven
would be idle and all the Tanith
ships would be Tanith-built. A
junior partner of Lothar Ffayle's also
came out, to establish a branch of the
Bank of Wardshaven at Rivington.</p>

<p>As soon as the <i>Queen Flavia</i> had
discharged her cargo and passengers,
she took on five hundred ground-fighters
from the <i>Lamia</i>, <i>Nemesis</i>
and <i>Space Scourge</i> companies and
spaced out on a raiding voyage.
While she was gone, the second
ship, the one Duke Angus had started
at Wardshaven and King Angus had
finished, the <i>Black Star</i>, came in.</p>

<p>Trask was slightly incredulous at
realizing that she had spaced out
from Gram almost exactly two years
after the <i>Nemesis</i> had departed. He
still hadn't any idea where Andray
Dunnan was, or what he was doing,
or how to find him.</p>

<p>The news of the Gram base on
Tanith spread slowly, first by the
scheduled liners and tramp freighters
that linked the Sword-Worlds, and
then by trading ships and outbound
Space Vikings to the Old Federation.
Two years and six months after the
<i>Nemesis</i> had come out of hyperspace
to find Boake Valkanhayn and
Garvan Spasso on Tanith, the first
independent Space Viking came in,
to sell a cargo and get repairs. They
bought his loot&mdash;he had been raiding
some planet rather above the
level of Khepera and below that of
Amaterasu&mdash;and healed the wounds
his ship had taken getting it. He had
been dealing with the Everrard family
on Hoth, and professed himself
much more satisfied with the bargains
he had gotten on Tanith and
swore to return.</p>

<p>He had never even heard of Andray
Dunnan or the <i>Enterprise</i>.</p>

<p>It was a Gilgamesher that brought
the first news.</p>

<p>He had first heard of Gilgameshers&mdash;the
word was used indiscriminately
for a native of or a ship from Gilgamesh&mdash;on
Gram, from Harkaman
and Karffard and Vann Larch and
the others. Since coming to Tanith,
he had heard about them from every
Space Viking, never in complimentary
and rarely in printable terms.</p>

<p>Gilgamesh was rated, with reservations,
as a civilized planet though not
on a level with Odin or Isis or Baldur
or Marduk or Aton or any of the other
worlds which had maintained the
culture of the Terran Federation uninterruptedly.
Perhaps Gilgamesh deserved
more credit; its people had
undergone two centuries of darkness
and pulled themselves out of it
by their bootstraps. They had recovered
all the old techniques, up to and
including the hyperdrive.</p>

<p>They didn't raid; they traded. They
had religious objections to violence,
though they kept these within sensible
limits, and were able and willing
to fight with fanatical ferocity in defense
of their home planet. About a
century before, there had been a five-ship
Viking raid on Gilgamesh; one
ship had returned and had been sold
for scrap after reaching a friendly
base. Their ships went everywhere
to trade, and wherever they traded a
few of them usually settled, and
where they settled they made money,
sending most of it home. Their society
seemed to be a loose theo-socialism,
and their religion an absurd
potpourri of most of the major
monotheisms of the Federation period,
plus doctrinal and ritualistic innovations
of their own. Aside from
their propensity for sharp trading,
their bigoted refusal to regard anybody
not of their creed as more than
half human, and the maze of dietary
and other taboos in which they hid
from social contact with others, made
them generally disliked.</p>

<p>After their ship had gotten into
orbit, three of them came down to do
business. The captain and his exec
wore long coats, almost knee-length,
buttoned to the throat, and small
white caps like forage caps; the
third, one of their priests, wore a
robe with a cowl, and the symbol of
their religion, a blue triangle in a
white circle, on his breast. They all
wore beards that hung down from
their cheeks, with their chins and
upper lips shaved. They all had the
same righteous, disapproving faces,
they all refused refreshments of any
sort, and they sat uneasily as though
fearing contamination from the heathens
who had sat in their chairs before
them. They had a mixed cargo
of general merchandise picked up
here and there on subcivilized planets,
in which nobody on Tanith was
interested. They also had some good
stuff&mdash;vegetable-amber and flame-bird
plumes from Irminsul; ivory or
something very like it from somewhere
else; diamonds and Uller organic
opals and Zarathustra sunstones.
They also had some platinum.
They wanted machinery, especially
contragravity engines and robots.</p>


<p>The trouble was, they wanted to
haggle. Haggling, it seemed,
was the Gilgamesh
planetary sport.</p>

<p>"Have you ever heard of a Space
Viking ship named the <i>Enterprise</i>?"
he asked them, at the seventh or
eighth impasse in the bargaining.
"She bears a crescent, light blue on
black. Her captain's name is Andray
Dunnan."</p>

<p>"A ship so named, with such a device,
raided Chermosh more than a
year ago," the priest-supercargo said.
"Some of our people tarry on Chermosh
to trade. This ship sacked the
city in which they were; some of
them lost heavily in world's goods."</p>

<p>"That's a pity."</p>

<p>The Gilgamesh priest shrugged.
"It is as Yah the Almighty wills," he
said, then brightened slightly. "The
Chermoshers are heathens and worshipers
of false gods. The Space Vikings
looted their temple and destroyed
it utterly; they carried away
the graven images and abominations.
Our people bore witness that there
was much wailing and lamentation
among the idolators."</p>

<hr/>

<p>So that was the first entry on the
Big Board. It covered, optimistically,
the whole of one wall in his office,
and for some time that one chalked
note about the raid on Chermosh,
and the date, as nearly as it could be
approximated, looked very lonely on
it. The captain of the <i>Black Star</i>
brought back material for a couple
more. He had put in on several planets
known to be temporarily occupied
by Space Vikings, to barter
loot, give his men some time off-ship,
and make inquiries, and he had
names for a couple of planets raided
by the blue crescent ship. One was
only six months old.</p>

<p>The way news filtered about in the
Old Federation, that was practically
hot off the stove.</p>

<p>The owner-captain of the <i>Alborak</i>
had something to add, when he
brought his ship in six months later.
He sipped his drink slowly, as though
he had limited himself to one and
wanted to make it last as long as possible.</p>

<p>"Almost two years ago, on Jagannath,"
he said. "The <i>Enterprise</i> was
on orbit there, getting some light repairs.
I met the man a few times.
Looks just like those pictures, but
he's wearing a small pointed beard,
now. He'd sold a lot of loot. General
merchandise, precious and semiprecious
stones, a lot of carved and inlaid
furniture that looked as though
it had come from some Neobarb
king's palace, and some temple
stuff. Buddhist; there were a couple
of big gold Dai-Butsus. His crew
were standing drinks for all comers.
Some of them were pretty dark above
the collar, as though they'd been on
a hot-star planet not too long before.
And he had a lot of Imhotep furs to
sell, simply fabulous stuff."</p>

<p>"What kind of repairs? Combat
damage?"</p>

<p>"That was my impression. He
spaced out a little over a hundred
hours after I came in, in company
with another ship. The <i>Starhopper</i>,
Captain Teodor Vaghn. The talk was
that they were making a two-ship
raid somewhere." The captain of the
<i>Alborak</i> thought for a moment. "One

other thing. He was buying ammunition,
everything from pistol cartridges
to hellburners. And he was
buying all the air-and-water recycling
equipment, and all the carniculture
and hydroponic equipment, he could
get."</p>

<p>That was something to know. He
thanked the Space Viking, and then
asked:</p>

<p>"Did he know, at the time, that
I'm out here hunting for him?"</p>

<p>"If he did, nobody else on Jagannath
did. I didn't hear about it, myself,
till six months afterward."</p>

<p>That evening, he played off the
recording he had made of the conversation
for Harkaman and Valkanhayn
and Karffard and some of the
others. Somebody instantly said:</p>

<p>"That temple stuff came from
Chermosh. They're Buddhists, there.
That checks with the Gilgamesher's
story."</p>

<p>"He got the furs on Imhotep; he
traded for them," Harkaman said.
"Nobody gets anything off Imhotep
by raiding. The planet's in the middle
of a glaciation, the land surface
down to the fiftieth parallel is iced
over solid. There is one city, ten or
fifteen thousand, and the rest of the
population is scattered around in
settlements of a couple of hundred
all along the face of the glaciers.
They're all hunters and trappers.
They have some contragravity, and
when a ship comes in, they spread
the news by radio and everybody
brings his furs to town. They use
telescope sights, and everybody over
ten years old can hit a man in the
head at five hundred yards. And big
weapons are no good; they're too
well dispersed. So the only way to get
anything out of them is to trade for
it."</p>

<p>"I think I know where he was,"
Alvyn Karffard said. "On Imhotep,
silver is a monetary metal. On Agni,
they use silver for sewer-pipe. Agni
is a hot-star planet, class B-3 sun.
And on Agni they are tough, and
they have good weapons. That could
be where the <i>Enterprise</i> took that
combat damage."</p>

<p>That started an argument as to
whether he'd gone to Chermosh first.
It was sure that he had gone to Agni
and then Imhotep. Guatt Kirbey
tried to figure both courses.</p>

<p>"It doesn't tell us anything, either
way," he said at length. "Chermosh
is away off to the side from Agni and
Imhotep in either case."</p>

<p>"Well, he does have a base, somewhere,
and it's not on any Terra-type
planet," Valkanhayn said. "Otherwise,
what would he want with all
that air-and-water and hydroponic
and carniculture stuff?"</p>

<p>The Old Federation area was full
of non-Terra-type planets, and why
should anybody bother going to any
of them? Any planet that wasn't
oxygen-atmosphere, six to eight thousand
miles in diameter, and within a
narrow surface-temperature range,
wasn't worth wasting time on. But a
planet like that, if one had the survival
equipment, would make a wonderful
hideout.</p>

<p>"What sort of a captain is this
Teodor Vaghn?" he asked.</p>

<p>"A good one," Harkaman said
promptly. "He has a nasty streak&mdash;sadistic&mdash;but
he knows his business
and he has a good ship and a well-trained
crew. You think he and
Dunnan have teamed up?"</p>

<p>"Don't you? I think, now that he
has a base, Dunnan is getting a fleet
together."</p>

<p>"He'll know we're after him by
now," Vann Larch said. "And he
knows where we are, and that puts
him one up on us."</p>

<!--se:split--><h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XVI</h2>


<p>So Andray Dunnan was haunting
him again. Tiny bits of information
came in&mdash;Dunnan's ship had been on
Hoth, on Nergal, selling loot. Now
he sold for gold or platinum, and
bought little, usually arms and ammunition.
Apparently his base,
wherever it was, was fully self-sufficient.
It was certain, too, that Dunnan
knew he was being hunted. One
Space Viking who had talked with
him quoted him as saying: "I don't
want any trouble with Trask, and if
he's smart he won't look for any with
me." This made him all the more
positive that somewhere Dunnan
was building strength for an attack
on Tanith. He made it a rule that
there should always be at least two
ships in orbit off Tanith in addition
to the <i>Lamia</i>, which was on permanent
patrol, and he installed more
missile-launching stations both on
the moon and on the planet.</p>

<p>There were three ships bearing the
Ward swords and atom-symbol, and
a fourth building on Gram. Count
Lionel of Newhaven was building
one of his own, and three big freighters
shuttled across the three thousand
light-years between Tanith and
Gram. Sesar Karvall, who had never
recovered from his wounds, had
died; Lady Lavina had turned the
barony and the business over to her
brother, Burt Sandrasan, and gone to
live on Excalibur. The shipyard at
Rivington was finished, and now
they had built the landing-legs of
Harkaman's <i>Corisande II</i>, and were
putting up the skeleton.</p>

<p>And they were trading with Amaterasu,
now. Pedrosan Pedro had
been overthrown and put to death by
General Dagr&oacute; Ector during the disorders
following the looting of Eglonsby;
the troops left behind in
Stolgoland had mutinied and made
common cause with their late enemies.
The two nations were in an uneasy
alliance, with several other nations
combining against them, when
the <i>Nemesis</i> and the <i>Space Scourge</i>
returned and declared peace against
the whole planet. There was no
fighting; everybody knew what had
happened to Stolgoland and Eglonsby.
In the end, all the governments
of Amaterasu joined in a loose agreement
to get the mines reopened and
resume production of gadolinium,
and to share in the fissionables being
imported in exchange.</p>

<p>It had been harder, and had taken
a year longer, to do business with
Beowulf. The Beowulfers had a single
planetary government, and they
were inclined to shoot first and negotiate
afterward, a natural enough attitude
in view of experiences of the
past. However, they had enough old
Federation-period textbooks still in
microprint to know what could be
done with gadolinium. They decided
to write off the past as fair
fight and no bad blood, and start over
again.</p>

<p>It would be some years before
either planet had hyperships of their
own. In the meantime, both were
good customers, and rapidly becoming
good friends. A number of
young Amaterasuans and Beowulfers
had come to Tanith to study various
technologies.</p>

<p>The Tanith locals were studying,
too. In the first year, Trask had gathered
the more intelligent boys of ten
to twelve from each community and
begun teaching them. In the past
year, he had sent the most intelligent
of them off to Gram to school. In another
five years, they'd be coming
home to teach; in the meantime, he
was bringing teachers to Tanith from
Gram. There was a school at Tradetown,
and others in some of the larger
villages, and at Rivington there
was something that could almost be
called a college. In another ten years
or so, Tanith would be able to pretend
to the status of civilization.</p>

<hr/>

<p>If only Andray Dunnan and his
ships didn't come too soon. They
would be beaten off, he was confident
of that; but the damage Tanith
would take, in the defense, would set
back his work for years. He knew all
too well what Space Viking ships
could do to a planet. He'd have to
find Dunnan's base, smash it, destroy
his ships, kill the man himself, first.
Not to avenge that murder six years
ago on Gram; that was long ago and
far away, and Elaine was vanished,
and so was the Lucas Trask who had
loved and lost her. What mattered
now was planting and nurturing civilization
on Tanith.</p>

<p>But where would he find Dunnan,
in two hundred billion cubic light-years?
Dunnan had no such problem.
He knew where his enemy was.</p>

<p>And Dunnan was gathering
strength. The <i>Yo-Yo</i>, Captain Vann
Humfort; she had been reported
twice, once in company with the
<i>Starhopper</i>, and once with the <i>Enterprise</i>.
She bore a blazon of a feminine
hand dangling a planet by a
string from one finger; a good ship,
and an able, ruthless captain. The
<i>Bolide</i>; she and the <i>Enterprise</i> had
made a raid on Ithunn. The Gilgameshers
had settled there and one of
their ships had brought that story in.</p>

<p>And he recruited two ships at once
on Melkarth, and there was a good
deal of mirth about that among the
Tanith Space Vikings.</p>

<p>Melkarth was strictly a poultry
planet. Its people had sunk to the
village-peasant level; they had no
wealth worth taking or carrying
away. It was, however, a place where
a ship could be set down, and there
were women, and the locals had not
lost the art of distillation, and made
potent liquors. A crew could have
fun there, much less expensively
than on a regular Viking base planet,

and for the last eight years a Captain
Nial Burrik, of the <i>Fortuna</i>, had been
occupying it, taking his ship out for
occasional quick raids and spending
most of the time living from day to
day almost on the local level. Once in
a while, a Gilgamesher would come
in to see if he had anything to trade.
It was a Gilgamesher who brought
the story to Tanith, and it was almost
two years old when he told it.</p>

<p>"We heard it from the people of
the planet, the ones who live where
Burrik had his base. First, there was
a trading ship came in. You may
have heard of her; she is the one
called the <i>Honest Horris</i>."</p>

<p>Trask laughed at that. Her captain,
Horris Sasstroff, called himself
"Honest Horris," a misnomer which
he had also bestowed on his ship.
He was a trader of sorts. Even the
Gilgameshers despised him, and not
even a Gilgamesher would have taken
a wretched craft like the <i>Honest
Horris</i> to space.</p>

<p>"He had been to Melkarth before,"
the Gilgamesher said. "He and Burrik
are friends." He pronounced that
like a final and damning judgment of
both of them. "The story the locals
told our brethren of the <i>Fairdealer</i>
was that the <i>Honest Horris</i> was
landed beside Burrik's ship for ten
days, when two other ships came in.
They said one had the blue crescent
badge, and the other bore a green
monster leaping from one star to
another."</p>

<p>The <i>Enterprise</i> and the <i>Starhopper</i>.
He wondered why they'd gone
to a planet like Melkarth. Maybe
they knew in advance whom they'd
find there.</p>

<p>"The locals thought there would
be fighting, but there was not. There
was a great feast, of all four crews.
Then everything of value was loaded
aboard the <i>Fortuna</i>, and all four ships
lifted and spaced out together. They
said Burrik left nothing of any
worth whatever behind; they were
much disappointed at that."</p>

<p>"Have any of them been back
since?"</p>

<p>All three Gilgameshers, captain,
exec, and priest, shook their heads.</p>

<p>"Captain Gurrash of the <i>Fairdealer</i>
said it had been over a year before
his ship put in there. He could still
see where the landing legs of the
ships had pressed into the ground,
but the locals said they had not been
back."</p>

<p>That made two more ships about
which inquiries must be made. He
wondered, for a moment, why in
Gehenna Dunnan would want ships
like that; they must make the <i>Space
Scourge</i> and the <i>Lamia</i> as he had
first seen them look like units of the
Royal Navy of Excalibur. Then he
became frightened, with an irrational
retrospective fright at what might
have happened. It could have, too, at
any time in the last year and a half;
either or both of those ships could
have come in on Tanith completely
unsuspected. It was only by the sheerest
accident that he had found out,
even now, about them.</p>

<p>Everybody else thought it was a
huge joke. They thought it would be
a bigger joke if Dunnan sent those

ships to Tanith now, when they were
warned and ready for them.</p>

<p>There were other things to worry
about. One was the altering attitude
of his Majesty Angus <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. When the
<i>Space Scourge</i> returned, the newly-titled
Baron Valkanhayn brought
with him, along with the princely
title and the commission as Viceroy
of Tanith, a most cordial personal
audiovisual greeting, warm and
friendly. Angus had made it seated
at his desk, bare headed and smoking
a cigarette. The one which had come
on the next ship out was just as cordial,
but the King was not smoking
and wore a small gold-circled cap-of-maintenance.
By the time they had
three ships in service on scheduled
three-month arrivals, a year and a
half later, he was speaking from his
throne, wearing his crown and employing
the first person plural for
himself and finally the third person
singular for Trask. By the end of the
fourth year, there was no audiovisual
message from him in person, and a
stiff complaint from Rovard Grauffis
to the effect that His Majesty felt it
unseemly for a subject to address his
sovereign while seated, even by audiovisual.
This was accompanied by
a rather apologetic personal message
from Grauffis&mdash;now Prime Minister&mdash;to
the effect that His Majesty felt
compelled to stand on his royal dignity
at all times, and that, after all,
there was a difference between the
position and dignity of the Duke of
Wardshaven and that of the Planetary
King of Gram.</p>

<p>Prince Trask of Tanith couldn't
quite see it. The King was simply
the first nobleman of the planet.
Even kings like Rodolf of Excalibur
or Napolyon of Flamberge didn't
try to be anything more. Thereafter,
he addressed his greetings and reports
to the Prime Minister, always
with a personal message, to which
Grauffis replied in kind.</p>

<p>Not only the form but also the
content of the messages from Gram
underwent change. His Majesty was
most dissatisfied. His Majesty was
deeply disappointed. His Majesty felt
that His Majesty's colonial realm of
Tanith was not contributing sufficiently
to the Royal Exchequer.
And his Majesty felt that Prince
Trask was placing entirely too much
emphasis upon trade and not enough
upon raiding; after all, why barter
with barbarians when it was possible
to take what you wanted from them
by force?</p>

<p>And there was the matter of the
<i>Blue Comet</i>, Count Lionel of Newhaven's
ship. His Majesty was most
displeased that the Count of Newhaven
was trading with Tanith from
his own spaceport. All goods from
Tanith should pass through the
Wardshaven spaceport.</p>

<p>"Look, Rovard," he told the audiovisual
camera which was recording
his reply to Grauffis. "You saw the
<i>Space Scourge</i> when she came in,
didn't you? That's what happens to a
ship that raids a planet where there's
anything worth taking. Beowulf is
lousy with fissionables; they'll give us
all the plutonium we can load, in exchange
for gadolinium, which we sell

them at about twice Sword-World
prices. We trade plutonium on Amaterasu
for gadolinium, and get it for
about half Sword-World prices." He
pressed the stop-button, until he
could remember the ancient formula.
"You may quote me as saying
that whoever has advised His Majesty
that that isn't good business is no
friend to His Majesty or to the
Realm.</p>

<p>"As for the complaint about the
<i>Blue Comet</i>; as long as she is owned
and operated by the Count of Newhaven,
who is a stockholder in the
Tanith Adventure, she has every
right to trade here."</p>

<p>He wondered why His Majesty
didn't stop Lionel of Newhaven
from sending the <i>Blue Comet</i> out
from Gram. He found out from her
skipper, the next time she came in.</p>

<hr/>

<p>"He doesn't dare, that's why. He's
King as long as the great lords like
Count Lionel and Joris of Bigglersport
and Alan of Northport want him
to be. Count Lionel has more men
and more guns and contragravity
than he has, now, and that's without
the help he'd get from everybody
else. Everything's quiet on Gram
now, even the war on Southmain
Continent's stopped. Everybody
wants to keep it that way. Even
King Angus isn't crazy enough to do
anything to start a war. Not yet, anyhow."</p>

<p>"Not <i>yet</i>?"</p>

<p>The captain of the <i>Blue Comet</i>,
who was one of Count Lionel's vassal
barons, was silent for a moment.</p>

<p>"You ought to know, Prince Trask,"
he said. "Andray Dunnan's grandmother
was the King's mother. Her
father was old Baron Zarvas of
Blackcliffe. He was what was called
an invalid, the last twenty years of
his life. He was always attended by
two male nurses about the size of
Otto Harkaman. He was also said
to be slightly eccentric."</p>

<p>The unfortunate grandfather of
Duke Angus had always been a subject
nice people avoided. The unfortunate
grandfather of King Angus
was probably a subject everybody
who valued their necks avoided.</p>

<p>Lothar Ffayle had also come out on
the <i>Blue Comet</i>. He was just as outspoken.</p>

<p>"I'm not going back. I'm transferring
most of the funds of the Bank
of Wardshaven out here; from now
on, it'll be a branch of the Bank of
Tanith. This is where the business is
being done. It's getting impossible
to do business at all in Wardshaven.
What little business there is to do."</p>

<p>"Just what's been happening?"</p>

<p>"Well, taxation, first. It seems the
more money came in from here, the
higher taxes got on Gram. Discriminatory
taxes, too; pinched the small
landholding and industrial barons
and favored a few big ones. Baron
Spasso and his crowd."</p>

<p>"Baron Spasso, now?"</p>

<p>Ffayle nodded. "Of about half of
Glaspyth. A lot of the Glaspyth barons
lost their baronies&mdash;some of
them their heads&mdash;after Duke Omfray
was run out. It seems there was
a plot against the life of His Majesty.
It was exposed by the zeal and vigilance
of Sir Garvan Spasso, who was
elevated to the peerage and rewarded
with the lands of the conspirators."</p>

<p>"You said business was bad, as
business?"</p>

<p>Ffayle nodded again. "The big Tanith
boom has busted. It got oversold;
everybody wanted in on it. And
they should never have built those
two last ships, the <i>Speedwell</i> and the
<i>Goodhope</i>; the return on them didn't
justify it. Then, you're creating your
own industries and building your
own equipment and armament here;
that's caused a slump in industry on
Gram. I'm glad Lavina Karvall has
enough money invested to live on.
And finally, the consumers' goods
market is getting flooded with stuff
that's coming in from here and competing
with Gram industry."</p>

<p>Well, that was understandable.
One of the ships that made the shuttle-trip
to Gram would carry enough
in her strong rooms, in gold and
jewels and the like, to pay a handsome
profit on the voyage. The bulk-goods
that went into the cargo holds
was practically taking a free ride, so
anything on hand, stuff that nobody
would ordinarily think of shipping
in interstellar trade, went aboard. A
two thousand foot freighter had a
great deal of cargo space.</p>

<p>Baron Trask of Traskon hadn't
even begun to realise what Tanith
base was going to cost Gram.</p>





<!--se:split--><h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman"><!--Beginning of 3rd installment.-->XVII</h2>


<p>As might be expected, the Beowulfers
finished their hypership
first. They had started with everything
but a little know-how which
had been quickly learned. Amaterasu
had had to begin by creating
the industry they needed to create
the industry they needed to build a
ship. The Beowulf ship&mdash;she was
named <i>Viking's Gift</i>&mdash;came in on
Tanith five and a half years after
the <i>Nemesis</i> and the <i>Space Scourge</i>
had raided Beowulf; her skipper
had fought a normal-drive ship in
that battle. Beside plutonium and
radioactive isotopes, she carried a
general cargo of the sort of luxury-goods
unique to Beowulf which
could always find a market in interstellar
trade.</p>

<p>After selling the cargo and depositing
the money in the Bank of
Tanith, the skipper of the <i>Viking's
Gift</i> wanted to know where he
could find a good planet to raid.
They gave him a list, none too
tough but all slightly above the
chicken-stealing level, and another
list of planets he was <i>not</i> to raid;
planets with which Tanith was
trading.</p>

<p>Six months later they learned
that he had showed up on Khepera,
with which they were now trading,
and had flooded the market there
with plundered textiles, hardware,
ceramics and plastics. He had
bought kregg-meat and hides.</p>

<p>"You see what you did, now?"
Harkaman clamored. "You thought
you were making a customer; what
you made was a competitor."</p>

<p>"What I made was an ally. If we
ever do find Dunnan's planet, we'll
need a fleet to take it. A couple of
Beowulf ships would help. You
know them; you fought them,
too."</p>

<p>Harkaman had other worries.
While cruising in <i>Corisande II</i>, he
had come in on Vitharr, one of the
planets where Tanith ships traded,
to find it being raided by a Space
Viking ship based on Xochitl. He
had fought a short but furious ship-action,
battering the invader until
he was glad to hyper out. Then he
had gone directly to Xochitl, arriving
on the heels of the ship he had
beaten, and had had it out both
with the captain and Prince Viktor,
serving them with an ultimatum to
leave Tanith trade-planets alone in
the future.</p>

<p>"How did they take it?" Trask
asked, when he returned to report.</p>

<p>"Just about the way you would
have. Viktor said his people were
Space Vikings, not Gilgameshers.
I told him we weren't Gilgameshers,
either, as he'd find out on
Xochitl the next time one of his
ships raided one of our planets. Are
you going to back me up? Of course,
you can always send Prince Viktor
my head, and an apology&mdash;"</p>

<p>"If I have to send him anything,
I'll send him a sky full of ships and
a planet full of hellburners. You did
perfectly right, Otto; exactly what
I'd have done in your place."</p>

<p>There the matter rested. There
were no more raids by Xochitl ships
on any of their trade-planets. No
mention of the incident was made
in any of the reports sent back to
Gram. The Gram situation was deteriorating
rapidly enough. Finally,
there was an audiovisual message
from Angus himself; he was seated
on his throne, wearing his crown,
and he began speaking from the
screen abruptly:</p>

<p>"We, Angus, King of Gram and
Tanith, are highly displeased with
our subject, Lucas, Prince and Viceroy
of Tanith; we consider ourselves
very badly served by Prince
Trask. We therefore command him
to return to Gram, and render to us
account of his administration of our
colony and realm of Tanith."</p>

<p>After some hasty preparations,
Trask recorded a reply. He was
sitting on a throne, himself, and he
wore a crown just as ornate as King
Angus', and robes of white and
black Imhotep furs.</p>

<p>"We, Lucas, Prince of Tanith,"
he began, "are quite willing to
acknowledge the suzerainty of the
King of Gram, formerly Duke of
Wardshaven. It is our earnest desire,
if possible, to remain at peace
and friendship with the King of
Gram, and to carry on trade relations
with him and with his
subjects.</p>

<p>"We must, however, reject absolutely
any efforts on his part to
dictate the internal policies of our
realm of Tanith. It is our earnest
hope,"&mdash;dammit, he'd said "earnest,"
he should have thought of
some other word&mdash;"that no act on
the part of his Majesty the King of
Gram will create any breach in the
friendship existing between his
realm and ours."</p>

<hr/>

<p>Three months later, the next ship,
which had left Gram while King
Angus' summons was still in hyperspace,
brought Baron Rathmore.
Shaking hands with him as he left
the landing craft, Trask wanted to
know if he'd been sent out as the
new Viceroy. Rathmore started to
laugh and ended by cursing vilely.</p>

<p>"No. I've come out to offer my
sword to the King of Tanith," he
said.</p>

<p>"Prince of Tanith, for the time
being," Trask corrected. "The
sword, however, is most acceptable.
I take it you've had all of our
blessed sovereign you can stomach?"</p>

<p>"Lucas, you have enough ships
and men here to take Gram," Rathmore
said. "Proclaim yourself King
of Tanith and then lay claim to the
throne of Gram and the whole
planet would rise for you."</p>

<p>Rathmore had lowered his voice,
but even so the open landing stage
was no place for this sort of talk.
He said so, ordered a couple of the
locals to collect Rathmore's luggage,
and got him into a hall-car,
taking him down to his living quarters.
After they were in private,
Rathmore began again:</p>

<p>"It's more than anybody can
stand! There isn't one of the old
great nobility he hasn't alienated,
or one of the minor barons, the
landholders and industrialists, the
people who were always the backbone
of Gram. And it goes from
them down to the commonfolk.
Assessments on the lords, taxes on
the people, inflation to meet the
taxes, high prices, debased coinage.
Everybody's being beggared except
this rabble of new lords he has
around him, and that slut of a wife
and her greedy kinfolk...."</p>

<p>Trask stiffened. "You're not
speaking of Queen Flavia, are you?"
he asked softly.</p>

<p>Rathmore's mouth opened slightly.
"Great Satan, don't you know?
No, of course not; the news would
have come on the same ship I did.
Why, Angus divorced Flavia. He
claimed that she was incapable of
giving him an heir to the throne.
He remarried immediately."</p>

<p>The girl's name meant nothing to
Trask; he did know of her father, a
Baron Valdiva. He was lord of a
small estate south of the Ward
lands and west of Newhaven. Most
of his people were out-and-out
bandits and cattle-rustlers, and he
was as close to being one himself
as he could get.</p>

<p>"Nice family he's married into.
A credit to the dignity of the
throne."</p>

<p>"Yes. You wouldn't know this
Lady-Demoiselle Evita; she was
only seventeen when you left Gram,
and hadn't begun to acquire a reputation
outside her father's lands.
She's made up for lost time since,
though. And she has enough uncles
and aunts and cousins and ex-lovers
and what-not to fill out an infantry
regiment, and every one of them's
at court with both hands out to
grab everything they can."</p>

<p>"How does Duke Joris like
this?" The Duke of Bigglersport
was Queen Flavia's brother. "I
daresay he's less than delighted."</p>

<p>"He's hiring mercenaries, is what
he's doing, and buying combat
contragravity. Lucas, why don't
you come back? You have no idea
what a reputation you have on
Gram, now. Everybody would rally
to you."</p>

<p>He shook his head, "I have a
throne, here on Tanith. On Gram
I want nothing. I'm sorry for the
way Angus turned out, I thought
he'd make a good King. But since
he's made an intolerable King, the
lords and people of Gram will have
to get rid of him for themselves. I
have my own tasks, here."</p>

<p>Rathmore shrugged. "I was
afraid that would be it," he said.
"Well, I offered my sword; I won't
take it back. I can help you in what
you're doing on Tanith."</p>

<hr/>

<p>The captain of the free Space Viking
<i>Damnthing</i> was named Roger-fan-Morvill
Esthersan, which
meant that he was some Sword-Worlder's
acknowledged bastard
by a woman of one of the Old Federation
planets. His mother's people
could have been Nergalers; he
had coarse black hair, a mahogany-brown
skin, and red-brown, almost
maroon, eyes. He tasted the wine
the robot poured for him and expressed
appreciation, then began
unwrapping the parcel he had
brought in.</p>

<p>"Something I found while raiding
on Tetragrammaton," he said.
"I thought you might like to have
it. It was made on Gram."</p>

<p>It was an automatic pistol, with
a belt and holster. The leather was
bisonoid-hide; the buckle of the
belt was an oval enameled with a
crescent, pale blue on black. The
pistol was a plain 10-mm military
model with grooved plastic grips;
on the receiver it bore the stamp of
the House of Hoylbar, the firearms
manufacturers of Glaspyth. Evidently
it was one of the arms Duke
Omfray had provided for Andray
Dunnan's original mercenary company.</p>

<p>"Tetragrammaton?" He glanced
over to the Big Board; there was
no previous report from that planet.
"How long ago?"</p>

<p>"I'd say about three hundred
hours. I came from there directly,
less than two hundred and fifty
hours. Dunnan's ships had left the
planet three days before I got
there."</p>

<p>That was practically sizzling hot.
Well, something like that had to
happen, sooner or later. The Space
Viking was asking him if he knew
what sort of a place Tetragrammaton
was.</p>

<p>Neobarbarian, trying to recivilize
in a crude way. Small population,
concentrated on one continent;
farming and fisheries. A little heavy
industry, in a small way, at a couple
of towns. They had some nuclear
power, introduced a century or so
ago by traders from Marduk, one
of the really civilized planets. They
still depended on Marduk for fissionables;
their export product was
an abominably-smelling vegetable
oil which furnished the base for
delicate perfumes, and which nobody
was ever able to synthesize
properly.</p>

<p>"I heard they had steel mills in
operation, now," the half-breed
Space Viking said. "It seems that
somebody on Rimmon has just re-invented
the railroad, and they
need more steel than they can produce
for themselves. I thought I'd
raid Tetragrammaton for steel and
trade it on Rimmon for a load of
heaven-tea. When I got there,
though, the whole planet was in a
mess; not raiding, but plain wanton
destruction. The locals were just
digging themselves out of it when I
landed. Some of them, who didn't
think they had anything at all left
to lose, gave me a fight. I captured
a few of them, to find out what had
happened. One of them had that
pistol; he said he'd taken it off a
Space Viking he'd killed. The ships
that raided them were the <i>Enterprise</i>
and the <i>Yo-Yo</i>. I knew you'd
want to hear about it. I got some
of the locals' stories on tape."</p>

<p>"Well, thank you. I'll want to
hear those tapes. Now, you say
you want steel?"</p>

<p>"Well, I haven't any money.
That's why I was going to raid
Tetragrammaton."</p>

<p>"Nifflheim with the money; your
cargo's paid for already. This," he
said, touching the pistol, "and
whatever's on the tapes."</p>


<p>They played off the tapes that
evening. They weren't particularly
informative. The locals who had
been interrogated hadn't been in
actual contact with Dunnan's people
except in combat. The man who
had been carrying the 10-mm Hoylbar
was the best witness of the lot,
and he knew little. He had caught
one of them alone, shot him from
behind with a shotgun, taken his
pistol, and then gotten away as
quickly as he could. They had sent
down landing craft, it seemed, and
said they wanted to trade; then
something must have happened,
nobody knew what, and they had
begun a massacre and sacked the
town. After returning to their
ships, they had opened fire with
nuclear missiles.</p>

<p>"Sounds like Dunnan," Hugh
Rathmore said in disgust. "He just
went kill-crazy. The bad blood of
Blackcliffe."</p>

<p>"There are funny things about
this," Boake Valkanhayn said.
"I'd say it was a terror-raid, but
who in Gehenna was he trying to
terrorize?"</p>

<p>"I wondered about that, too."
Harkaman frowned. "This town
where he landed seems, such as it
was, to have been the planetary
capital. They just landed, pretending
friendship, which I can't see
why they needed to pretend, and
then began looting and massacring.
There wasn't anything of real value
there; all they took was what the
men could carry themselves or stuff
into their landing craft, and they
did that because they have what
amounts to a religious taboo against
landing anywhere and leaving without
stealing something. The real
loot was at these two other towns;
a steel mill and big stocks of steel
at one, and all that skunk-apple oil
at the other. So what did they do?
They dropped a five-megaton bomb
on each one, and blew both of them
to Em-See-Square. That was a
terror-raid pure and simple, but
as Boake inquires, just who were
they terrorizing? If there were big
cities somewhere else on the planet,
it would figure. But there aren't.
They blew out the two biggest
cities, and all the loot in them."</p>

<hr/>

<p>"Then they wanted to terrorize
somebody off the planet."</p>

<p>"But nobody'd hear about it
off-planet," somebody protested.</p>

<p>"The Mardukans would; they
trade with Tetragrammaton," the
acknowledged bastard of somebody
named Morvill said. "They have a
couple of ships a year there."</p>

<p>"That's right," Trask agreed.
"Marduk."</p>

<p>"You mean, you think Dunnan's
trying to terrorize <i>Marduk</i>?" Valkanhayn
demanded. "Great Satan,
even he isn't crazy enough for
that!"</p>

<p>Baron Rathmore started to say
something about what Andray
Dunnan was crazy enough to do,
and what his uncle was crazy
enough to do. It was just one of the
cracks he had been making since
he'd come to Tanith and didn't
have to look over his shoulder
while he was making them.</p>

<p>"I think he is, too," Trask said.
"I think that is exactly what he is
doing. Don't ask me why; as Otto
is fond of remarking, he's crazy and
we aren't, and that gives him an
advantage. But what have we gotten,
since those Gilgameshers told
us about his picking up Burrik's
ship and the <i>Honest Horris</i>? Until
today, we've heard nothing from
any other Space Viking. What we
have gotten was stories from Gilgameshers
about raids on planets
where they trade, and every one of
them is also a planet where Marduk
ships trade. And in every case,
there has been little or nothing
reported about valuable loot taken.
The stories are all about wanton
and murderous bombings. I think
Andray Dunnan is making war on
Marduk."</p>

<p>"Then he's crazier than his
grandfather and his uncle both!"
Rathmore cried.</p>

<p>"You mean, he's making a string
of terror-raids on their trade-planets,
hoping to pull the Mardukan
space-navy away from the home
planet?" Harkaman had stopped
being incredulous. "And when he
gets them all lured away, he'll
make a fast raid?"</p>

<p>"That's what I think. Remember
our fundamental postulate: Dunnan
is crazy. Remember how he convinced
himself that he was the
rightful heir to the ducal crown of
Wardshaven?" And remember his
insane passion for Elaine; he pushed
that thought hastily from him.
"Now, he's convinced that he's the
greatest Space Viking in history.
He has to do something worthy of
that distinction. When was the last
time anybody attacked a civilized
planet? I don't mean Gilgamesh, I
mean a planet like Marduk."</p>

<p>"A hundred and twenty years
ago; Prince Havilgar of Haulteclere,
six ships, against Aton. Two
ships got back. He didn't. Nobody's
tried it since," Harkaman said.</p>

<p>"So Dunnan the Great will do it.
I hope he tries," he surprised himself
by adding. "That's provided I
find out what happened. Then I
could stop thinking about him."</p>

<p>There was a time when he had
dreaded the possibility that somebody
else might kill Dunnan before
he could.</p>




<!--se:split--><h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XVIII</h2>


<p>Seshat, Obidicut, Lugaluru, Audhumla.</p>

<p>The young man elevated by his
father's death in the Dunnan raid
to the post of hereditary President
of the democratic Republic of
Tetragrammaton had been sure
that the Marduk ships which came
to his planet traded also on those.
There had been some difficulty
about making contact, and the
first face-to-face meeting had begun
in an atmosphere of bitter distrust
on his part. They had met out of
doors; around them, spread wrecked
and burned buildings, and hastily
constructed huts and shelters, and
wide spaces of charred and slagged
rubble.</p>

<p>"They blew up the steel mill
here, and the oil-refinery at Jannsboro.
They bombed and strafed the
little farm-towns and villages. They
scattered radioactives that killed
as many as the bombing. And after
they had gone away, this other
ship came."</p>

<p>"The <i>Damnthing</i>? She bore the
head of a beast with three very big
horns?"</p>

<p>"That's the one. They did a little
damage, at first. When the captain
found out what had happened to
us, he left some food and medicines
for us." Roger-fan-Morvill Esthersan
hadn't mentioned that.</p>

<p>"Well, we'd like to help you, if
we can. Do you have nuclear power?
We can give you a little equipment.
Just remember it of us, when you're
back on your feet; we'll be back to
trade later. But don't think you
owe us anything. The man who did
this to you is my enemy. Now, I
want to talk to every one of your
people who can tell me anything at
all...."</p>

<p>Seshat was the closest; they went
there first. They were too late.
Seshat had had it already, and on
the evidence of the radioactivity
counters, not too long ago. Four
hundred hours at most. There had
been two hellburners; the cities on
which they had fallen were still-smoking
pits literally burned into
the ground and the bedrock below,
at the center of five hundred mile
radii of slag and lava and scorched
earth and burned forests. There had
been a planetbuster; it had started a
major earthquake. And half a dozen
thermonuclears. There were probably
quite a few survivors&mdash;a human
planetary population is extremely
hard to exterminate completely&mdash;but
within a century
they'd be back to the loincloth and
the stone hatchet.</p>

<p>"We don't even know Dunnan
did it, personally," Paytrik Morland
said. "For all we know, he's
down in an air-tight cave city on
some planet nobody ever heard of,
sitting on a golden throne, surrounded
by a harem."</p>

<p>He had begun to suspect that
Dunnan was doing something of
just the sort. The Greatest Space
Viking of History would naturally
found a Space Viking empire.</p>

<p>"An emperor goes out to look
his empire over, now and then; I
don't spend all my time on Tanith.
Say we try Audhumla next. It's the
farthest away. We might get there
while he's still shooting up Obidicut
and Lugaluru. Guatt, figure us a
jump for it."</p>

<p>When the colored turbulence
washed away and the screen cleared,
Audhumla looked like Tanith or
Khepera or Amaterasu or any other
Terra-type planet, a big disk brilliant
with reflected sunlight and
glowing with starlit and moonlit
atmosphere on the other. There was
a single rather large moon, and, in
the telescopic screen, the usual
markings of seas and continents and
rivers and mountain-ranges. But
there was nothing to show....</p>

<p>Oh, yes; lights on the darkened
side, and from the size they must
be vast cities. All the available
data for Audhumla was long out of
date; a considerable civilization
must have developed in the last
half dozen centuries.</p>

<p>Another light appeared, a hard
blue-white spark that spread into a
larger, less brilliant yellow light.
At the same time, all the alarm-devices
in the command-room went
into a pandemonium of jangling
and flashing and squawking and
howling and shouting. Radiation.
Energy-release. Contragravity distortion
effects. Infra-red output. A
welter of indecipherable radio and
communication-screen signals. Radar
and scanner-ray beams from the
planet.</p>

<p>Trask's fist began hurting; he
found that he had been pounding
the desk in front of him with it. He
stopped it.</p>

<p>"We caught him, we caught
him!" he was yelling hoarsely.
"Full speed in, continuous acceleration,
as much as we can stand.
We'll worry about decelerating
when we're in shooting distance."</p>

<p>The planet grew steadily larger;
Karffard was taking him at his
word about continuous acceleration.
There'd be a Gehenna of a bill
to pay when they started decelerating.
On the planet, more bombs
were going off just outside atmosphere
beyond the sunset line.</p>

<p>"Ship observed. Altitude about a
hundred to five hundred miles&mdash;hundreds,
not thousands&mdash;35&deg;
North Latitude, 15&deg; west of the
sunset line. Ship is under fire, bomb
explosions near her," a voice
whooped.</p>

<p>Somebody else was yelling that
the city lights were really burning
cities, or burning forests. The first
voice, having stopped, broke in
again:</p>

<p>"Ship is visible in telescopic
screen, just at the sunset line. And
there's another ship detected but
not visible, somewhere around the
equator, and a third one somewhere
out of sight, we can just get the
fringe of her contragravity field
around the planet."</p>

<p>That meant there were two sides,
and a fight. Unless Dunnan had
picked up a third ship, somewhere.
The telescopic view shifted; for a
moment the planet was completely
off-screen, and then its curvature
came into the screen against a star-scattered
background. They were
almost in to two thousand miles
now; Karffard was yelling to stop
acceleration and trying to put the
ship into a spiral orbit. Suddenly
they caught a glimpse of one of the
ships.</p>

<p>"She's in trouble." That was
Paul Koreff's voice. "She's leaking
air and water vapor like crazy."</p>

<p>"Well, is she a good guy or a bad
guy?" Morland was yelling back,
as though Koreff's spectroscopes
could distinguish. Koreff ignored
that.</p>

<p>"Another ship making signal,"
he said. "She's the one coming up
over the equator. Sword-World impulse
code; her communication-screen
combination, and an identify-yourself."</p>

<p>Karffard punched out the combination
as Koreff furnished it.
While Trask was desperately willing
his face into immobility, the
screen lighted. It wasn't Andray
Dunnan; that was a disappointment.
It was almost as good,
though. His henchman, Sir Nevil
Ormm.</p>

<p>"Well, Sir Nevil! A pleasant surprise,"
he heard himself saying.
"We last met on the terrace at
Karvall House, did we not?"</p>

<p>For once, the paper-white face
of Andray Dunnan's <i>&acirc;me damn&eacute;e</i>
showed expression, but whether it
was fear, surprise, shock, hatred,
anger, or what combination of
them, Trask could no more than
guess.</p>

<p>"Trask! Satan curse you ...!"</p>

<p>Then the screen went blank. In
the telescopic screen, the other ship
came on unfalteringly. Paul Koreff,
who had gotten more data on mass,
engine energy-output and dimensions,
was identifying her as the
<i>Enterprise</i>.</p>

<p>"Well, go for her! Give her
everything!"</p>

<hr/>

<p>They didn't need the order; Vann
Larch was speaking rapidly into
his hand-phone, and Alvyn Karffard
was hurling his voice all over the
<i>Nemesis</i>, warning of sudden deceleration
and direction change,
and while he was speaking, things
in the command room began sliding.
In the telescopic screen, the
other ship was plainly visible; he
could see the oval patch of black
with the blue crescent, and in his
screen Dunnan would be seeing the
sword-impaled skull of the <i>Nemesis</i>.</p>

<p>If only he could be sure Dunnan
was there to see it. If it had only
been Dunnan's face, instead of
Ormm's, that he had seen in the
screen. As it was, he couldn't be
sure, and if one of the missiles that
were already going out made a
lucky hit, he might never be sure.
He didn't care who killed Dunnan,
or how. All he wanted was to
know that Dunnan's death had set
him free from a self-assumed obligation
that was now meaningless
to him.</p>

<p>The <i>Enterprise</i> launched counter-missiles;
so did the <i>Nemesis</i>. There
were momentarily unbearable
flashes of pure energy and from them
globes of incandescence spread and
vanished. Something must have
gotten through; red lights flashed
on the damage board. It had been
something heavy enough even to
jolt the huge mass of the <i>Nemesis</i>.
At the same time, the other ship
took a hit from something that
would have vaporized her had she
not been armored in collapsium.
Then, as they passed close together,
guns hammered back and forth
along with missiles, and then the
<i>Enterprise</i> was out of sight around
the horizon.</p>

<p>Another ship, the size of Otto
Harkaman's <i>Corisande II</i>, was approaching;
she bore a tapering, red-nailed
feminine hand dangling a
planet by a string. They rushed
toward each other, planting a garden
of evanescent fire-flowers between
them; they pounded one another
with guns, and then they
sped apart. At the same time, Paul
Koreff was picking up an impulse-code
signal from the third, crippled,
ship; a screen combination. Trask
punched it out as he received it.</p>

<p>A man in space armor was looking
out of the screen. That was bad,
if they had to suit up in the command
room. They still had air; his
helmet was off, but it was attached
and hinged back. On his breastplate
was a device of a dragonlike
beast perched with its tail around a
planet, and a crown above. He had
a thin, high-cheeked face, with a
vertical wrinkle between his eyes,
and a clipped blond mustache.</p>

<p>"Who are you, stranger. You're
fighting my enemies; does that
make you a friend."</p>

<p>"I'm a friend of anybody who
owns Andray Dunnan his enemy.
Sword-World ship <i>Nemesis</i>; I'm
Prince Lucas Trask of Tanith, commanding."</p>

<p>"Royal Mardukan ship <i>Victrix</i>."
The thin-faced man gave a wry
laugh. "Not been living up to her
name so well. I'm Prince Simon
Bentrik, commanding."</p>

<p>"Are you still battle-worthy?"</p>

<p>"We can fire about half our guns;
we still have a few missiles left.
Seventy per cent of the ship's sealed
off, and we've been holed in a
dozen places. We have power
enough for lift and some steering-way.
We can't make lateral way
except at the expense of lift."</p>

<p>Which made the <i>Victrix</i> practically
a stationary target. He yelled
over his shoulder at Karffard to cut
speed all he could without tearing
things apart.</p>

<p>"When that cripple comes into
view, start circling around her. Get
into a tight circle above her." He
turned back to the man in the
screen. "If we can get ourselves
slowed down enough, we'll do all
we can to cover you."</p>

<p>"All you can is all you can;
thank you, Prince Trask."</p>

<p>"Here comes the <i>Enterprise</i>!"
Karffard shouted, with obscenely
blasphemous embellishments. "She
hairpinned on us."</p>

<p>"Well, do something about her!"</p>

<hr/>

<p>Vann Larch was already doing it.
The <i>Enterprise</i> had taken damage in
the last exchange; Koreff's spectroscopes
showed her halo-ed with air
and water vapor. Her instruments
would be getting the same story
from the <i>Nemesis</i>; wedge-shaped
segments extending six to eight
decks in were sealed off in several
places. Then the only thing that
could be seen with certainty was
the blaze of mutually destroying
missiles between. The short-range
gun duel began and ended as they
passed.</p>

<p>In the screen, he had seen a fat
round-nosed thing come up from the
<i>Victrix</i>, curving far out ahead of the
passing <i>Enterprise</i>. She was almost
out of sight around the planet when
she ran head-on into it, and vanished
in an awesome blaze. For a
moment, he thought she had been
destroyed, then she lurched into
sight and went around the curvature
of Audhumla.</p>

<p>Trask and the Mardukan were
shaking hands with themselves at
each other in their screens; everybody
in the <i>Nemesis</i> command room
was screaming: "Well shot, <i>Victrix</i>!
Well shot!"</p>

<p>Then the <i>Yo-Yo</i> was coming
around again, and Vann Larch was
saying, "Gehenna with this fooling
around! I'll fix the expurgated
unprintability!"</p>

<p>He yelled orders&mdash;a jumble of
code letters and numbers&mdash;and
things began going out. Most of
them blew up in space. Then the
<i>Yo-Yo</i> blew up, very quietly, as
things do where there is no air to
carry shock-and sound-waves, but
very brilliantly. There was brief
daylight all over the night side of
the planet.</p>

<p>"That was our planetbuster,"
Larch said. "I don't know what
we'll use on Dunnan."</p>

<p>"I didn't know we had one,"
Trask admitted.</p>

<p>"Otto had a couple built on
Beowulf. The Beowulfers are good
nuclear weaponeers."</p>

<p>The <i>Enterprise</i> came back, hastily,
to see what had blown up. Larch
put off another entertainment of
small stuff, with a fifty megaton
thermonuclear, viewscreen-piloted,
among them. It had its own arsenal
of small missiles, and it got
through. In the telescopic screen, a
jagged hole was visible just below
the equator of the <i>Enterprise</i>, the
edges curling outward. Something,
possibly a heavy missile in an open
tube, ready for launching, had gone
off inside her. What the inside of
the ship was like, or how many of
her company were still alive, was
hard to guess.</p>

<p>There were some, and her launchers
were still spewing out missiles.
They were intercepted and blew up.
The hull of the <i>Enterprise</i> bulked
huge in the guidance-screen of the
missile and filled it; the jagged
crater that had obliterated the bottom
of Dunnan's blue crescent
blazon spread to fill the whole
screen. The screen went milky
white as the pickup went off.</p>

<p>All the other screens blazed
briefly, until their filters went on.
Even afterward, they glared like the
cloud-veiled sun of Gram at high
noon. Finally, when the light-intensity
had dropped and the filters
went off, there was nothing left of
the <i>Enterprise</i> but an orange haze.</p>

<p>Somebody&mdash;Paytrik, Baron Morland,
he saw&mdash;was pounding him
on the back and screaming inarticulately
in his ear. A dozen space-armored
officers with planet-perched
dragons on their breasts
were crowding beside Prince Bentrik
in the screen from the <i>Victrix</i>,
whooping like drunken bisonoid-herders
on payday night.</p>

<p>"I wonder," he said, almost
inaudibly, "if I'll ever know if
Andray Dunnan was on that ship."</p>




<!--se:split--><h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XIX</h2>


<p>Prince Trask of Tanith and Prince
Simon Bentrik were dining together
on an upper terrace of what had
originally been the mansion house
of a Federation period plantation.
It had been a number of other
things since; now it was the municipal
building of a town that had
grown around it, which had, somehow,
escaped undamaged from the
Dunnan blitz. Normally about five
or ten thousand, the place was now
jammed with almost fifty thousand
homeless refugees from half a dozen
other towns that had been destroyed,
overflowing the buildings
and crowding into a sprawling
camp of hastily built huts and
shelters, and already permanent
buildings were going up to accommodate
them. Everybody, locals,
Mardukans and Space Vikings, had
been busy with the work of relief
and reconstruction; this was the
first meal the two commanders had
been able to share in any leisure at
all. Prince Bentrik's enjoyment of
it was somewhat impaired by the
fact that from where he sat he
could see, in the distance, the
sphere of his disabled ship.</p>

<p>"I doubt we can get her off-planet
again, let alone into hyperspace."</p>

<p>"Well, we'll get you and your
crew to Marduk in the <i>Nemesis</i>,
then." They were both speaking
loudly, above the clank and clatter
of machinery below. "I hope you
didn't think I'd leave you stranded
here."</p>

<p>"I don't know how either of us
will be received. Space Vikings
haven't been exactly popular on
Marduk, lately. They may thank
you for bringing me back to stand
trial," Bentrik said bitterly. "Why,
I'd have anybody shot who let his
ship get caught as I did mine.
Those two were down in atmosphere
before I knew they'd come
out of hyperspace."</p>

<p>"I think they were down on the
planet before your ship arrived."</p>

<p>"Oh, that's ridiculous, Prince
Trask!" the Mardukan cried. "You
can't hide a ship on a planet. Not
from the kind of instruments we
have in the Royal Navy."</p>

<p>"We have pretty fair detection
ourselves," Trask reminded him.
"There's one place where you can
do it. At the bottom of an ocean,
with a thousand or so feet of water
over her. That's where I was going
to hide the <i>Nemesis</i>, if I got here
ahead of Dunnan."</p>

<p>Prince Bentrik's fork stopped
half way to his mouth. He lowered
it slowly to his plate. That was a
theory he'd like to accept, if he
could.</p>

<p>"But the locals. They didn't
know about it."</p>

<p>"They wouldn't. They have no
off-planet detection of their own.
Come in directly over the ocean,
out of the sun, and nobody'd see
the ship."</p>

<p>"Is that a regular Space Viking
trick?"</p>

<p>"No. I invented it myself, on the
way from Seshat. But if Dunnan
wanted to ambush your ship, he'd
have thought of it, too. It's the
only practical way to do it."</p>

<p>Dunnan, or Nevil Ormm; he
wished he knew, and was afraid he
would go on wishing all his life.</p>

<p>Bentrik started to pick up his
fork again, changed his mind, and
sipped from his wineglass instead.</p>

<p>"You may find you're quite welcome
on Marduk, at that," he said.
"These raids have only been a serious
problem in the last four years.
I believe, as you do, that this enemy
of yours is responsible for all of
them. We have half the Royal
Navy out now, patrolling our
trade-planets. Even if he wasn't
aboard the <i>Enterprise</i> when you
blew her up, you've put a name on
him and can tell us a good deal
about him." He set down the wineglass.
"Why, if it weren't so utterly
ridiculous, one might even think
he was making war on Marduk."</p>

<p>From Trask's viewpoint, it
wasn't ridiculous at all. He merely
mentioned that Andray Dunnan
was psychotic and let it go at that.</p>

<hr/>

<p>The <i>Victrix</i> was not completely
unrepairable, although quite beyond
the resources at hand. A fully
equipped engineer-ship from Marduk
could patch her hull and replace
her Dillinghams and her
Abbot lift-and-drive engines and
make her temporarily spaceworthy,
until she could be gotten to a shipyard.
They concentrated on repairing
the <i>Nemesis</i>, and in another two
weeks she was ready for the voyage.</p>

<p>The six hundred hour trip to
Marduk passed pleasantly enough.
The Mardukan officers were good
company, and found their Space
Viking opposite numbers equally
so. The two crews had become
used to working together on Audhumla,
and mingled amicably off
watch, interesting themselves in
each other's hobbies and listening
avidly to tales of each other's
home planets. The Space Vikings
were surprised and disappointed at
the somewhat lower intellectual
level of the Mardukans. They
couldn't understand that; Marduk
was supposed to be a civilized
planet, wasn't it? The Mardukans
were just as surprised, and inclined
to be resentful, that the Space Vikings
all acted and talked like officers.
Hearing of it, Prince Bentrik
was also puzzled. Fo'c'sle hands
on a Mardukan ship belonged
definitely to the lower orders.</p>

<p>"There's still too much free land
and free opportunity on the Sword-Worlds,"
Trask explained. "Nobody
does much bowing and scraping
to the class above him; he's too
busy trying to shove himself up
into it. And the men who ship out
as Space Vikings are the least class-conscious
of the lot. Think my men
may have trouble on Marduk about
that? They'll all insist on doing
their drinking in the swankiest
places in town."</p>


<p>"No. I don't think so. Everybody
will be so amazed that Space
Vikings aren't twelve feet tall,
with three horns like a Zarathustra
damnthing and a spiked tail like a
Fafnir mantichore that they won't
even notice anything less. Might
do some good, in the long run.
Crown Prince Edvard will like your
Space Vikings. He's much opposed
to class distinctions and caste prejudices.
Says they have to be eliminated
before we can make democracy
really work."</p>

<p>The Mardukans talked a lot
about democracy. They thought
well of it; their government was a
representative democracy. It was
also a hereditary monarchy, if that
made any kind of sense. Trask's
efforts to explain the political and
social structure of the Sword-Worlds
met the same incomprehension
from Bentrik.</p>

<p>"Why, it sounds like feudalism
to me!"</p>

<p>"That's right; that's what it is.
A king owes his position to the
support of his great nobles; they
owe theirs to their barons and landholding
knights; they owe theirs
to their people. There are limits
beyond which none of them can go;
after that, their vassals turn on
them."</p>

<p>"Well, suppose the people of
some barony rebel? Won't the king
send troops to support the baron?"</p>

<p>"What troops? Outside a personal
guard and enough men to
police the royal city and hold the
crown lands, the king has no
troops. If he wants troops, he has
to get them from his great nobles;
they have to get them from their
vassal barons, who raise them by
calling out their people." That was
another source of dissatisfaction
with King Angus of Gram; he had
been augmenting his forces by hiring
off-planet mercenaries. "And
the people won't help some other
baron oppress his people; it might
be their turn next."</p>

<hr/>

<p>"You mean, the people are
armed?" Prince Bentrik was incredulous.</p>

<p>"Great Satan, aren't yours?"
Prince Trask was equally surprised.
"Then your democracy's a farce,
and the people are only free on
sufferance. If their ballots aren't
secured by arms, they're worthless.
Who has the arms on your planet?"</p>

<p>"Why, the Government."</p>

<p>"You mean the King?"</p>

<p>Prince Bentrik was shocked. Certainly
not; horrid idea. That would
be ... why, it would be <i>despotism</i>!
Besides, the King wasn't the
Government, at all; the Government
ruled in the King's name.
There was the Assembly; the Chamber
of Representatives, and the
Chamber of Delegates. The people
elected the Representatives, and the
Representatives elected the Delegates,
and the Delegates elected the
Chancellor. Then, there was the
Prime Minister; he was appointed
by the King, but the King had to
appoint him from the party holding
the most seats in the Chamber of
Representatives, and he appointed
the Ministers, who handled the
executive work of the Government,
only their subordinates in the different
Ministries were career-officials
who were selected by competitive
examination for the bottom jobs
and promoted up the bureaucratic
ladder from there.</p>

<p>This left Trask wondering if the
Mardukan constitution hadn't
been devised by Goldberg, the
legendary Old Terran inventor who
always did everything the hard
way. It also left him wondering
just how in Gehenna the Government
of Marduk ever got anything
done.</p>

<p>Maybe it didn't. Maybe that was
what saved Marduk from having a
real despotism.</p>

<p>"Well, what prevents the Government
from enslaving the people?
The people can't; you just told me
that they aren't armed, and the
Government is."</p>

<p>He continued, pausing now and
then for breath, to catalogue every
tyranny he had ever heard of, from
those practiced by the Terran Federation
before the Big War to those
practiced at Eglonsby on Amaterasu
by Pedrosan Pedro. A few of
the very mildest were pushing the
nobles and people of Gram to revolt
against Angus <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>.</p>

<p>"And in the end," he finished,
"the Government would be the
only property owner and the only
employer on the planet, and everybody
else would be slaves, working
at assigned tasks, wearing Government-issued
clothing and eating
Government food, their children
educated as the Government prescribes
and trained for jobs selected
for them by the Government, never
reading a book or seeing a play or
thinking a thought that the Government
had not approved...."</p>

<p>Most of the Mardukans were
laughing, now. Some of them were
accusing him of being just too
utterly ridiculous.</p>

<p>"Why, the people <i>are</i> the Government.
The people would not
legislate themselves into slavery."</p>

<p>He wished Otto Harkaman were
there. All he knew of history was
the little he had gotten from reading
some of Harkaman's books, and
the long, rambling conversations
aboard ship in hyperspace or in the
evenings at Rivington. But Harkaman,
he was sure, could have furnished
hundreds of instances, on
scores of planets and over ten centuries
of time, in which people had
done exactly that and hadn't known
what they were doing, even after it
was too late.</p>

<hr/>

<p>"They have something about
like that on Aton," one of the
Mardukan officers said.</p>

<p>"Oh, Aton; that's a dictatorship,
pure and simple. That Planetary
Nationalist gang got into control
fifty years ago, during the crisis
after the war with Baldur...."</p>

<p>"They were voted into power by
the people, weren't they?"</p>

<p>"Yes; they were," Prince Bentrik
said gravely. "It was an emergency
measure, and they were given emergency
powers. Once they were in,
they made the emergency permanent."</p>

<p>"That couldn't happen on Marduk!"
a young nobleman declared.</p>

<p>"It could if Zaspar Makann's
party wins control of the Assembly
at the next election," somebody
else said.</p>

<p>"Oh, then Marduk's safe! The
sun'll go nova first," one of the
junior Royal Navy officers said.</p>

<p>After that, they began talking
about women, a subject any spaceman
will drop any other subject to
discuss.</p>

<p>Trask made a mental note of the
name of Zaspar Makann, and took
occasion to bring it up in conversation
with his shipboard guests.
Every time he talked about Makann
to two or more Mardukans, he
heard at least three or more opinions
about the man. He was a political
demagogue; on that everybody
agreed. After that, opinions
diverged.</p>

<p>Makann was a raving lunatic,
and all the followers he had were a
handful of lunatics like him. He
might be a lunatic, but he had a
dangerously large following. Well,
not so large; maybe they'd pick up
a seat or so in the Assembly, but
that was doubtful&mdash;not enough of
them in any representative district
to elect an Assemblyman. He was
just a smart crook, milking a lot of
half-witted plebeians for all he
could get out of them. Not just
plebes, either; a lot of industrialists
were secretly financing him, in
hope that he would help them
break up the labor unions. You're
nuts; everybody knew the labor
unions were backing him, hoping
he'd scare the employers into granting
concessions. You're both nuts;
he was backed by the mercantile
interests; they were hoping he'd
run the Gilgameshers off the planet.</p>

<p>Well, that was one thing you
had to give him credit for. He
wanted to run out the Gilgameshers.
Everybody was in favor of that.</p>

<p>Now, Trask could remember something
he'd gotten from Harkaman.
There had been Hitler, back at the
end of the First Century Pre-Atomic;
hadn't he gotten into
power because everybody was in
favor of running out the Christians,
or the Moslems, or the Albigensians,
or somebody?</p>




<!--se:split--><h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XX</h2>


<p>Marduk had three moons; a big
one, fifteen hundred miles in diameter,
and two insignificant twenty-mile
chunks of rock. The big one
was fortified, and a couple of ships
were in orbit around it. The
<i>Nemesis</i> was challenged as she
emerged from her last hyperjump;
both ships broke orbit and came
out to meet her, and several more
were detected lifting away from
the planet.</p>

<p>Prince Bentrik took the communication
screen, and immediately
encountered difficulties. The commandant,
even after the situation
had been explained twice to him,
couldn't understand. A Royal Navy
fleet unit knocked out in a battle
with Space Vikings was bad
enough, but being rescued and
brought to Marduk by another
Space Viking simply didn't make
sense. He then screened the Royal
Palace at Malverton, on the planet;
first he was icily polite to somebody
several echelons below him in the
peerage, and then respectfully polite
to somebody he addressed as
Prince Vandarvant. Finally, after
some minutes' wait, a frail, white-haired
man in a little black cap-of-maintenance
appeared in the screen.
Prince Bentrik instantly sprang to
his feet. So did all the other Mardukans
in the command room.</p>

<p>"Your Majesty! I am most deeply
honored!"</p>

<p>"Are you all right, Simon?"
the old gentleman asked solicitously.
"They haven't done anything
to you, have they?"</p>

<p>"Saved my life, and my men's,
and treated me like a friend and a
comrade, Your Majesty. Have I
your permission to present, informally,
their commander, Prince
Trask of Tanith?"</p>

<p>"Indeed you may, Simon. I owe
the gentleman my deepest thanks."</p>

<p>"His Majesty, Mikhyl the
Eighth, Planetary King of Marduk,"
Prince Bentrik said. "His
Highness, Lucas, Prince Trask,
Planetary Viceroy of Tanith for his
Majesty Angus the First of Gram."</p>

<p>The elderly monarch bowed his
head slightly; Trask bowed a little
more deeply, from the waist.</p>

<p>"I am very happy, Prince Trask,
first, I confess, at the safe return of
my kinsman Prince Bentrik, and
then at the honor of meeting one
in the confidence of my fellow
sovereign King Angus of Gram.
I will never be ungrateful for what
you did for my cousin and for his
officers and men. You must stay at
the Palace while you are on this
planet; I am giving orders for your
reception, and I wish you to be
formally presented to me this
evening." He hesitated briefly.
"Gram; that is one of the Sword-Worlds,
is it not?" Another brief
hesitation. "Are you really a Space
Viking, Prince Trask?"</p>

<p>Maybe he'd expected Space
Vikings to have three horns and a
spiked tail and stand twelve feet
tall, himself.</p>

<p>It took several hours for the
<i>Nemesis</i> to get into orbit. Bentrik
spent most of them in a screen-booth,
and emerged visibly relieved.</p>

<p>"Nobody's going to be sticky
about what happened on Audhumla,"
he told Trask. "There will be
a Board of Inquiry. I'm afraid
I had to mix you up in that. It's
not only about the action on
Audhumla; everybody from the
Space Minister down wants to
hear what you know about this
fellow Dunnan. Like yourself, we
all hope he went to Em-See-Square
along with his flagship, but we
can't take it for granted. We have
over a dozen trade-planets to protect,
and he's hit more than half
of them already."</p>

<p>The process of getting into orbit
took them around the planet several
times, and it was a more impressive
spectacle at each circuit.
Of course, Marduk had a population
of almost two billion, and had been
civilized, with no hiatus of Neobarbarism,
since it had first been
colonized in the Fourth Century.
Even so, the Space Vikings were
amazed&mdash;and stubbornly refusing
to show it&mdash;at what they saw in
the telescopic screens.</p>

<p>"Look at that city!" Paytrik
Morland whispered. "We talk
about the civilized planets, but I
never realized they were anything
like this. Why, this makes Excalibur
look like Tanith!"</p>

<hr/>

<p>The city was Malverton, the
capital; like any city of a contragravity-using
people, it lay in a
rough circle of buildings towering
out of green interspaces, surrounded
by the smaller circles of spaceports
and industrial suburbs. The difference
was that any of these were
as large as Camelot on Excalibur or
four Wardshavens on Gram, and
Malverton itself was almost half
the size of the whole barony of
Traskon.</p>

<p>"They aren't any more civilized
that we are, Paytrik. There are just
more of them. If there were two
billion people on Gram&mdash;which I
hope there never will be&mdash;Gram
would have cities like this, too."</p>

<p>One thing; the government of a
planet like Marduk would have to
be something more elaborate than
the loose feudalism of the Sword-Worlds.
Maybe this Goldberg-ocracy
of theirs had been forced
upon them by the sheer complexity
of the population and its problems.</p>

<p>Alvyn Karffard took a quick look
around him to make sure none of
the Mardukans were in earshot.</p>

<p>"I don't care how many people
they have," he said. "Marduk can
be had. A wolf never cares how
many sheep there are in a flock.
With twenty ships, we could take
this planet like we took Eglonsby.
There'd be losses coming in, sure,
but after we were in and down,
we'd have it."</p>

<p>"Where would we get twenty
ships?"</p>

<p>Tanith, at a pinch, could muster
five or six, counting the free Space
Vikings who used the base facilities;
they would have to leave a
couple to hold the planet. Beowulf
had one, and another almost completed,
and now there was an Amaterasu
ship. But to assemble a
Space Viking armada of twenty....
He shook his head. The
real reason why Space Vikings had
never raided a civilized planet successfully
had always been their
inability to combine under one
command in sufficient strength.</p>

<p>Besides, he didn't want to raid
Marduk. A raid, if successful,
would yield immense treasures, but
cause a hundred, even a thousand,
times as much destruction, and he
didn't want to destroy anything
civilized.</p>

<p>The landing stages of the palace
were crowded when he and Prince
Bentrik landed, and, at a discreet
distance, swarms of air-vehicles circled,
creating a control problem for
the police. Parting from Bentrik, he
was escorted to the suite prepared
for him; it was luxurious in the
extreme but scarcely above Sword-World
standards. There were a
surprising number of human servants,
groveling and fawning and
getting underfoot and doing work
robots could have been doing better.
What robots there were were
inefficient, and much work and ingenuity
had been lavished on
efforts to copy human form to the
detriment of function.</p>

<p>After getting rid of most of the
superfluous servants, he put on a
screen and began sampling the
newscasts. There were telescopic
views of the <i>Nemesis</i> from some
craft on orbit nearby, and he
watched the officers and men of the
<i>Victrix</i> being disembarked; there
were other views of their landing
at some naval installation on the
ground, and he could see reporters
being chevied away by Navy
ground-police. And there was a
wide range of commentary opinion.</p>

<p>The Government had already
denied that, (1) Prince Bentrik had
captured the <i>Nemesis</i> and brought
her in as a prize, and, (2) the Space
Vikings had captured Prince Bentrik
and were holding him for

ransom. Beyond that, the Government
was trying to sit on the whole
story, and the Opposition was hinting
darkly at corrupt deals and
sinister plots. Prince Bentrik arrived
in the midst of an impassioned
tirade against pusillanimous
traitors surrounding his Majesty
who were betraying Marduk to the
Space Vikings.</p>

<p>"Why doesn't your Government
publish the facts and put a stop to
that nonsense?" Trask asked.</p>

<p>"Oh, let them rave," Bentrik
replied. "The longer the Government
waits, the more they'll be
ridiculed when the facts are published."</p>

<p>Or, the more people will be
convinced that the Government
had something to hush up, and had
to take time to construct a plausible
story. He kept the thought to himself.
It was their government; how
they mismanaged it was their own
business. He found that there was
no bartending robot; he had to
have a human servant bring drinks.
He made up his mind to have a few
of the <i>Nemesis</i> robots sent down to
him.</p>

<hr/>

<p>The formal presentation would be
in the evening; there would be a
dinner first, and because Trask had
not yet been formally presented, he
couldn't dine with the King, but
because he was, or claimed to be,
Viceroy of Tanith, he ranked as
a chief of state and would dine with
the Crown Prince, to whom there
would be an informal introduction
first.</p>

<p>This took place in a small ante-chamber
off the banquet hall; the
Crown Prince and Crown Princess
and Princess Bentrik were there
when they arrived. The Crown
Prince was a man of middle age,
graying at the temples, with the
glassy stare that betrayed contact
lenses. The resemblance between
him and his father was apparent;
both had the same studious and
impractical expression, and might
have been professors on the same
university faculty. He shook hands
with Trask, assuring him of the
gratitude of the Court and Royal
Family.</p>

<p>"You know, Simon is next in
succession, after myself and my
little daughter," he said. "That's
too close to take chances with
him." He turned to Bentrik. "I'm
afraid this is your last space adventure,
Simon. You'll have to be a
spaceport spaceman from now on."</p>

<p>"I shan't be sorry," Princess
Bentrik said. "And if anybody
owes Prince Trask gratitude, I do."
She pressed his hands warmly.
"Prince Trask, my son wants to
meet you, very badly. He's ten
years old, and he thinks Space
Vikings are romantic heroes."</p>

<p>"He should be one, for a while."</p>

<p>He should just see a planet Space
Vikings had raided.</p>

<p>Most of the people at the upper
end of the table were diplomats&mdash;ambassadors
from Odin and Baldur
and Isis and Ishtar and Aton and
the other civilized worlds. No
doubt they hadn't actually expected
horns and a spiked tail, or even
tattooing and a nose ring, but after
all, Space Vikings were just some
sort of Neobarbarians, weren't
they? On the other hand, they had
all seen views and gotten descriptions
of the <i>Nemesis</i>, and had heard
about the ship-action on Audhumla,
and this Prince Trask&mdash;a Space
Viking prince; that sounded civilized
enough&mdash;had saved a life with
only three other lives, one almost
at an end, between it and the
throne. And they had heard about
the screen conversation with King
Mikhyl. So they were courteous
through the meal, and tried to get
as close as possible to him in the
procession to the throne room.</p>

<p>King Mikhyl wore a golden
crown topped by the planetary
emblem, which must have weighed
twice as much as a combat helmet,
and fur-edged robes that would
weigh more than a suit of space
armor. They weren't nearly as
ornate, though, as the regalia of
King Angus <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> of Gram. He rose to
clasp Prince Bentrik's hand, calling
him "dear cousin," and congratulating
him on his gallant
fight and fortunate escape. That
knocks any court-martial talk on
the head, Trask thought. He remained
standing to shake hands
with Trask, calling him "valued
friend to me and my house." First
person singular; that must be
causing some lifted eyebrows.</p>

<p>Then the King sat down, and the
rest of the roomful filed up onto
the dais to be received, and
finally it was over and the king rose
and proceeded, followed by his immediate
suite between the bowing
and curtsying court and out the
wide doors. After a decent interval,
Crown Prince Edvard escorted him
and Prince Bentrik down the same
route, the others falling in behind,
and across the hall to the ballroom,
where there was soft music and
refreshments. It wasn't too unlike
a court reception on Excalibur,
except that the drinks and canapes
were being dispensed by human
servants.</p>

<p>He was wondering what sort of
court functions Angus the First
of Gram was holding by now.</p>

<p>After half an hour, a posse of
court functionaries approached and
informed him that it had pleased
his Majesty to command Prince
Trask to attend him in his private
chambers. There was an audible
gasp at this; both Prince Bentrik
and the Crown Prince were trying
not to grin too broadly. Evidently
this didn't happen too often. He
followed the functionaries from the
ballroom, and the eyes of everybody
else followed him.</p>

<hr/>

<p>Old King Mikhyl received him
alone, in a small, comfortably
shabby room behind vast ones of
incredible splendor. He wore fur-lined
slippers and a loose robe
with a fur collar, and his little
black cap-of-maintenance. He was

standing when Trask entered; when
the guards closed the door and left
them alone, he beckoned Trask to
a couple of chairs, with a low table,
on which were decanters and glasses
and cigars, between.</p>

<p>"It's a presumption on royal
authority to summon you from the
ballroom," he began, after they had
seated themselves and filled glasses.
"You are quite the cynosure, you
know."</p>

<p>"I'm grateful to Your Majesty.
It's both comfortable and quiet
here, and I can sit down. Your
Majesty was the center of attention
in the throne room, yet I seemed to
detect a look of relief as you
left it."</p>

<p>"I try to hide it, as much as
possible." The old King took off
the little gold-circled cap and hung
it on the back of his chair. "Majesty
can be rather wearying, you
know."</p>

<p>So he could come here and put
it off. Trask felt that some gesture
should be made on his own part.
He unfastened the dress-dagger
from his belt and laid it on the
table. The King nodded.</p>

<p>"Now, we can be a couple of
honest tradesmen, our shops closed
for the evening, relaxing over our
wine and tobacco," he said. "Eh,
Goodman Lucas?"</p>

<p>It seemed like an initiation into
a secret society whose ritual he
must guess at step by step.</p>

<p>"Right, Goodman Mikhyl."</p>

<p>They lifted their glasses to each
other and drank; Goodman Mikhyl
offered cigars, and Goodman Lucas
held a light for him.</p>

<p>"I hear a few hard things about
your trade, Goodman Lucas."</p>

<p>"All true, and mostly understated.
We're professional murderers
and robbers, as one of my fellow
tradesmen says. The worst of it is
that robbery and murder become
just that: a trade, like servicing
robots or selling groceries."</p>

<p>"Yet you fought two other Space
Vikings to cover my cousin's crippled
<i>Victrix</i>. Why?"</p>

<p>So he must tell his tale, so worn
and smooth, again. King Mikhyl's
cigar went out while he listened.</p>

<p>"And you have been hunting him
ever since? And now, you can't be
sure whether you killed him or
not?"</p>

<p>"I'm afraid I didn't. The man in
the screen is the only man Dunnan
can really trust. One or the other
would stay wherever he has his
base all the time."</p>

<p>"And when you do kill him;
what then?"</p>

<p>"I'll go on trying to make a
civilized planet of Tanith. Sooner
or later, I'll have one quarrel too
many with King Angus, and then
we will be our Majesty Lucas the
First of Tanith, and we will sit on
a throne and receive our subjects.
And I'll be glad when I can get my
crown off and talk to a few men
who call me 'shipmate,' instead of
'Your Majesty.'"</p>

<hr/>

<p>"Well, it would violate professional
ethics for me to advise a


subject to renounce his sovereign,
of course, but that might be an
excellent thing. You met the ambassador
from Ithavoll at dinner,
did you not? Three centuries ago,
Ithavoll was a colony of Marduk&mdash;it
seems we can't afford colonies,
any more&mdash;and it seceded from us.
Ithavoll was then a planet like your
Tanith seems to be. Today, it is
a civilized world, and one of
Marduk's best friends. You know,
sometimes I think a few lights are
coming on again, here and there in
the Old Federation. If so, you Space
Vikings are helping to light them."</p>

<p>"You mean the planets we use
as bases, and the things we teach
the locals?"</p>

<p>"That, too, of course. Civilization
needs civilized technologies.
But they have to be used for civilized
ends. Do you know anything
about a Space Viking raid on Aton,
over a century ago?"</p>

<p>"Six ships from Haulteclere; four
destroyed, the other two returned
damaged and without booty."</p>

<p>The King of Marduk nodded.</p>

<p>"That raid saved civilization on
Aton. There were four great nations;
the two greatest were at the
brink of war, and the others were
waiting to pounce on the exhausted
victor and then fight each other
for the spoils. The Space Vikings
forced them to unite. Out of that
temporary alliance came the League
for Common Defense, and from that
the Planetary Republic. The Republic's
a dictatorship, now, and
just between Goodman Mikhyl and
Goodman Lucas it's a nasty one
and our Majesty's Government
doesn't like it at all. It will be
smashed sooner or later, but they'll
never go back to divided sovereignty
and nationalism again.
The Space Vikings frightened them
out of that when the dangers inherent
in it couldn't. Maybe this
man Dunnan will do the same for us
on Marduk."</p>

<p>"You have troubles?"</p>

<p>"You've seen decivilized planets.
How does it happen?"</p>

<p>"I know how it's happened on a
good many: War. Destruction of
cities and industries. Survivors
among ruins, too busy keeping
their own bodies alive to try to
keep civilization alive. Then they
lose all knowledge of how to be
civilized."</p>

<p>"That's catastrophic decivilization.
There is also decivilization by
erosion, and while it's going on,
nobody notices it. Everybody is
proud of their civilization, their
wealth and culture. But trade is
falling off; fewer ships come in
each year. So there is boastful talk
about planetary self-sufficiency;
who needs off-planet trade anyhow?
Everybody seems to have money,
but the government is always
broke. Deficit spending&mdash;and always
the vital social services for
which the government has to spend
money. The most vital one, of
course, is buying votes to keep the
government in power. And it gets
harder for the government to get
anything done.</p>

<p>"The soldiers are sloppier at
drill, and their uniforms and weapons
aren't taken care of. The noncoms
are insolent. And more and
more parts of the city are dangerous
at night, and then even in the daytime.
And it's been years since a
new building went up, and the old
ones aren't being repaired any
more."</p>

<p>Trask closed his eyes. Again, he
could feel the mellow sun of Gram
on his back, and hear the laughing
voices on the lower terrace, and he
was talking to Lothar Ffayle and
Rovard Grauffis and Alex Gorram
and Cousin Nikkolay and Otto
Harkaman. He said:</p>

<p>"And finally, nobody bothers fixing
anything up. And the power-reactors
stop, and nobody seems to
be able to get them started again.
It hasn't quite gotten that far on
the Sword-Worlds yet."</p>

<p>"It hasn't here, either. Yet."
Goodman Mikhyl slipped away;
King Mikhyl VIII looked across
the low table at his guest. "Prince
Trask, have you heard of a man
named Zaspar Makann?"</p>

<p>"Occasionally. Nothing good
about him."</p>

<p>"He is the most dangerous man
on this planet," the King said.
"And I can make nobody believe it.
Not even my son."</p>




<!--se:split--><h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXI</h2>


<p>Prince Bentrik's ten-year-old son,
Count Steven of Ravary, wore the
uniform of an ensign of the Royal
Navy; he was accompanied by his
tutor, an elderly Navy captain.
They both stopped in the doorway
of Trask's suite, and the boy
saluted smartly.</p>

<p>"Permission to come aboard,
sir?" he asked.</p>

<p>"Welcome aboard, count; captain.
Belay the ceremony and find
seats; you're just in time for second
breakfast."</p>

<p>As they sat down, he aimed his
ultraviolet light-pencil at a serving
robot. Unlike Mardukan robots,
which looked like surrealist conceptions
of Pre-Atomic armored
knights, it was a smooth ovoid
floating a few inches from the floor
on its own contragravity; as it
approached, its top opened like a
bursting beetle shell and hinged
trays of food swung out. The boy
looked at it in fascination.</p>

<p>"Is that a Sword-World robot,
sir, or did you capture it somewhere?"</p>

<p>"It's one of our own." He was
pardonably proud; it had been
built on Tanith a year before. "Has
an ultrasonic dishwasher underneath,
and it does some cooking on
top, at the back."</p>

<p>The elderly captain was, if anything,
even more impressed than
his young charge. He knew what
went into it, and he had some conception
of the society that would
develop things like that.</p>

<p>"I take it you don't use many
human servants, with robots like
that," he said.</p>

<p>"Not many. We're all low-population
planets, and nobody wants
to be a servant."</p>

<p>"We have too many people on
Marduk, and all of them want soft
jobs as nobles' servants," the captain
said. "Those that want any
kind of jobs."</p>

<p>"You need all your people for
fighting men, don't you?" the boy
count asked.</p>

<p>"Well, we need a good many.
The smallest of our ships will carry
five hundred men; most of them
around eight hundred."</p>

<p>The captain lifted an eyebrow.
The complement of the <i>Victrix</i> had
been three hundred, and she'd been
a big ship. Then he nodded.</p>

<p>"Of course. Most of them are
ground-fighters."</p>

<p>That started Count Steven off.
Questions, about battles and raids
and booty and the planets Trask
had seen.</p>

<p>"I wish I were a Space Viking!"</p>

<p>"Well, you can't be, Count
Ravary. You're an officer of the
Royal Navy. You're supposed to
fight Space Vikings."</p>

<p>"I won't fight you."</p>

<p>"You'd have to, if the King commanded,"
the old captain told him.</p>

<p>"No. Prince Trask is my friend.
He saved my father's life."</p>

<p>"And I won't fight you, either,
count. We'll make a lot of fireworks,
and then we'll each go home
and claim victory. How would that
be?"</p>

<p>"I've heard of things like that,"
the captain said. "We had a war
with Odin, seventy years ago, that
was mostly that sort of battles."</p>

<p>"Besides, the King is Prince
Trask's friend, too," the boy insisted.
"Father and Mummy heard
him say so, right on the Throne.
Kings don't lie when they're on the
Throne, do they?"</p>

<p>"Good Kings don't," Trask told
him.</p>

<p>"Ours is a good King," the
young Count of Ravary declared
proudly. "I would do anything my
King commanded. Except fight
Prince Trask. My house owes
Prince Trask a debt."</p>

<p>Trask nodded approvingly.
"That's the way a Sword-World
noble would talk, Count Steven,"
he said.</p>

<hr/>

<p>The Board of Inquiry, that afternoon,
was more like a small and
very sedate cocktail party. An Admiral
Shefter, who seemed to be
very high high-brass, presided
while carefully avoiding the appearance
of doing so. Alvyn Karffard
and Vann Larch and Paytrik
Morland were there from the
<i>Nemesis</i>, and Bentrik and several of
the officers from the <i>Victrix</i>, and
there were a couple of Naval Intelligence
officers, and somebody from
Operational Planning, and from
Ship Construction and Research &amp;
Development. They chatted pleasantly
and in a deceptively random
manner for a while. Then Shefter
said:</p>

<p>"Well, there's no blame or censure
of any sort for the way Commodore
Prince Bentrik was surprised.
That couldn't have been
avoided, at the time." He looked
at the Research &amp; Development
officer. "It shouldn't be allowed to
happen many more times, though."</p>

<p>"Not many more, sir. I'd say
it'll take my people a month,
and then the time it'll take to get
all the ships equipped as they
come in."</p>

<p>Ship Construction didn't think
that would take too long.</p>

<p>"We'll see to it that you get
full information on the new submarine
detection system, Prince
Trask," the admiral said.</p>

<p>"You gentlemen understand
you'll have to keep it under your
helmets, though," one of the Intelligence
men added. "If it got
out that we were informing Space
Vikings about our technical secrets...."
He felt the back of his
neck in a way that made Trask suspect
that beheadment was the
customary form of execution on
Marduk.</p>

<p>"We'll have to find out where
the fellow has his base," Operational
Planning said. "I take it,
Prince Trask, that you're not going
to assume that he was on his flagship
when you blew it, and just put
paid to him and forget him?"</p>

<p>"Oh, no. I'm assuming that he
wasn't. I don't believe he and
Ormm went anywhere on the same
ship, after he came out here and
established a base. I think one of
them would stay home all the
time."</p>

<p>"Well, we'll give you everything
we have on them," Shefter promised.
"Most of that is classified
and you'll have to keep quiet about
it, too. I just skimmed over the
summary of what you gave us;
I daresay we'll both get a lot of new
information. Have you any idea at
all where he might be based, Prince
Trask?"</p>

<p>"Only that we think it's a non-Terra-type
planet." He told them
about Dunnan's heavy purchases of
air-and-water recycling equipment
and carniculture and hydroponic
material. "That, of course, helps a
great deal."</p>

<p>"Yes; there are only about five
million planets in the former Federation
space-volume that are inhabitable
in artificial environment.
Including a few completely covered
by seas, where you could put in
underwater dome cities if you had
the time and material."</p>

<p>One of the Intelligence officers
had been nursing a glass with a tiny
remnant of cocktail in it. He
downed it suddenly, filled the glass
again, and glowered at it in silence
for a while. Then he drank it
briskly and refilled it.</p>

<p>"What I should like to know,"
he said, "is how this double obscenity
of a Dunnan knew we'd
have a ship on Audhumla just when
we did," he said. "Your talking
about underwater dome-cities reminded
me of it. I don't think he
just pulled that planet out of a hat
and then went there prepared to sit
on the bottom of the ocean for a
year and a half waiting for something
to turn up. I think he knew
the <i>Victrix</i> was coming to Audhumla,
and just about when."</p>

<p>"I don't like that, commodore,"
Shefter said.</p>

<p>"You think I do, sir?" the Intelligence
officer countered. "There
it is, though. We all have to face
it."</p>

<p>"We do," Shefter agreed. "Get
on it, commodore, and I don't need
to caution you to screen everybody
you put onto it very carefully." He
looked at his own glass; it had a
bare thimbleful in the bottom. He
replenished it slowly and carefully.
"It's been a long time since the
Navy's had anything like this to
worry about." He turned to Trask.
"I suppose I can get in touch with
you at the Palace whenever I
must?"</p>

<p>"Well, Prince Trask and I have
been invited as house-guests at
Prince Edvard's, I mean Baron
Cragdale's, hunting lodge," Bentrik
said. "We'll be going there directly
from here."</p>

<p>"Ah." Admiral Shefter smiled
slightly. Beside not having three
horns and a spiked tail, this Space
Viking was definitely <i>persona grata</i>
with the Royal Family. "Well,
we'll keep in contact, Prince
Trask."</p>

<p>The hunting lodge where Crown
Prince Edvard was simple Baron
Cragdale lay at the head of a
sharply-sloping mountain valley
down which a river tumbled.
Mountains rose on either side in
high scarps, some topped with perpetual
snow, glaciers curling down
from them. The lower ranges were
forested, as was the valley between,
and there was a red-mauve alpenglow
on the great peak that rose
from the head of the valley. For the
first time in over a year, Elaine was
with him, silently clinging to him
to see the beauty of it through his
eyes. He had thought that she had
gone from him forever.</p>

<p>The hunting lodge itself was not
quite what a Sword-Worlder would
expect a hunting lodge to be. At
first sight, from the air, it looked
like a sundial, a slender tower rising
like a gnomen above a circle of low
buildings and formal gardens. The
boat landed at the foot of it, and he
and Prince and Princess Bentrik and
the young Count of Ravary and his
tutor descended. Immediately, they
were beset by a flurry of servants;
the second boat, with the Bentrik
servants and their luggage, was
circling in to land. Elaine, he discovered,
wasn't with him any more,
and then he was separated from the
Bentriks and was being floated up
an inside shaft in a lifter-car. More
servants installed him in his rooms,
unpacked his cases, drew his bath
and even tried to help him take it,
and fussed over him while he
dressed.</p>

<p>There were over a score for dinner.
Bentrik had warned him that
he'd find some odd types; maybe he
meant that they wouldn't all be
nobles. Among the commoners
there were some professors, mostly
social sciences, a labor leader, a
couple of Representatives and a
member of the Chamber of Delegates,
and a couple of social workers,
whatever that meant.</p>

<p>His own table companion was a
Lady Valerie Alvarath. She was
beautiful&mdash;black hair, and almost
startlingly blue eyes, a combination
unusual in the Sword-Worlds&mdash;and
she was intelligent, or at least
cleverly articulate. She was introduced
as the lady-companion of the
Crown Prince's daughter. When he
asked where the daughter was, she
laughed.</p>

<p>"She won't be helping entertain
visiting Space Vikings for a long
time, Prince Trask. She is precisely
eight years old; I saw her getting
ready for bed before I came down
here. I'll look in on her after
dinner."</p>

<p>Then the Crown Princess Melanie,
on his other hand, asked him
some question about Sword-World
court etiquette. He stuck to generalities,
and what he could remember
from a presentation at the
court of Excalibur during his student
days. These people had a
monarchy since before Gram had
been colonized; he wasn't going to
admit that Gram's had been established
since he went off-planet. The
table was small enough for everybody
to hear what he was saying
and to feed questions to him. It
lasted all through the meal, and
continued when they adjourned for
coffee in the library.</p>

<p>"But what about your form of
government, your social structure,
that sort of thing?" somebody,
impatient with the artificialities of
the court, wanted to know.</p>

<p>"Well, we don't use the word
government very much," he replied.
"We talk a lot about authority
and sovereignty, and I'm
afraid we burn entirely too much
powder over it, but government
always seems to us like sovereignty
interfering in matters that don't
concern it. As long as sovereignty
maintains a reasonable semblance
of good public order and makes the
more serious forms of crime fairly
hazardous for the criminals, we're
satisfied."</p>

<p>"But that's just negative. Doesn't
the government do anything positive
for the people?"</p>

<p>He tried to explain the Sword-World
feudal system to them. It
was hard, he found, to explain
something you have taken for
granted all your life to somebody
who is quite unfamiliar with it.</p>

<hr/>

<p>"But the government&mdash;the sovereignty,
since you don't like the
other word&mdash;doesn't do anything
for the people!" one of the professors
objected. "It leaves all the
social services to the whim of the
individual lord or baron."</p>

<p>"And the people have no voice
at all; why, that's tyranny," a
professor Assemblyman added.</p>

<p>He tried to explain that the people
had a very distinct and commanding
voice, and that barons
and lords who wanted to stay alive
listened attentively to it. The Assemblyman
changed his mind; that
wasn't tyranny, it was anarchy.
And the professor was still insistent
about who performed the social
services.</p>

<p>"If you mean schools and hospitals
and keeping the city clean, the
people do that for themselves. The
government, if you want to think of
it as that, just sees to it that nobody's
shooting at them while
they're doing it."</p>

<p>"That isn't what Professor Pullwell
means, Lucas. He means old-age
pensions," Prince Bentrik said.
"Like this thing Zaspar Makann's
whooping for."</p>

<p>He'd heard about that, on the
voyage from Audhumla. Every
person on Marduk would be retired
on an adequate pension after
thirty years regular employment or
at the age of sixty. When he had
wanted to know where the money
would come from, he had been told
that there would be a sales tax, and
that the pensions must all be spent
within thirty days, which would
stimulate business, and the increased
business would provide tax
money to pay the pensions.</p>

<p>"We have a joke about three
Gilgameshers space-wrecked on an
uninhabited planet," he said. "Ten
years later, when they were rescued,
all three were immensely
wealthy, from trading hats with
each other. That's about the way
this thing will work."</p>

<p>One of the lady social workers
bristled; it wasn't right to make
derogatory jokes about racial
groups. One of the professors harrumphed;
wasn't a parallel at all,
the Self-Sustaining Rotary Pension
Plan was perfectly feasible. With a
shock, Trask recalled that he was a
professor of economics.</p>

<p>Alvyn Karffard wouldn't need
any twenty ships to loot Marduk.
Just infiltrate it with about a hundred
smart confidence men and inside
a year they'd own everything
on it.</p>

<p>That started them all off on
Zaspar Makann, though. Some of
them thought he had a few good
ideas, but was damaging his own
case by extremism. One of the
wealthier nobles said that he was a
reproach to the ruling class; it was
their fault that people like Makann
could gain a following. One old
gentleman said that maybe the
Gilgameshers were to blame, themselves,
for some of the animosity
toward them. He was immediately
set upon by all the others and verbally
torn to pieces on the spot.</p>

<p>Trask didn't feel it proper to
quote Goodman Mikhyl to this
crowd. He took the responsibility
upon himself for saying:</p>

<p>"From what I've heard of him, I
think he's the most serious threat
to civilized society on Marduk."</p>

<p>They didn't call him crazy, after
all he was a guest, but they didn't
ask him what he meant, either.
They merely told him that Makann
was a crackpot with a contemptible
following of half-wits, and just
wait till the election and see what
happened.</p>

<p>"I'm inclined to agree with
Prince Trask," Bentrik said soberly.
"And I'm afraid the election results
will be a shock to us, not to
Makann."</p>

<p>He hadn't talked that way on the
ship. Maybe he'd been looking
around and doing some thinking,
since he got back. He might have
been talking to Goodman Mikhyl,
too. There was a screen in the room.
He nodded toward it.</p>

<p>"He's speaking at a rally of the
People's Welfare Party at Drepplin,
now," he said. "May I put it on,
to show you what I mean?"</p>

<p>When the Crown Prince assented,
he snapped on the screen and twiddled
at the selector.</p>

<hr/>

<p>A face looked out of it. The features
weren't Andray Dunnan's&mdash;the
mouth was wider, the cheekbones
broader, the chin more
rounded. But his eyes were Dunnan's,
as Trask had seen them on
the terrace of Karvall House. Mad
eyes. His high-pitched voice
screamed:</p>

<p>"Our beloved sovereign is a
prisoner! He is surrounded by
traitors! The Ministries are full of
them! They are all traitors! The
bloodthirsty reactionaries of the
falsely so-called Crown Loyalist
Party! The grasping conspiracy of
the interstellar bankers! The dirty
Gilgameshers! They are all leagued
together in an unholy conspiracy!
And now this Space Viking, this
bloody-handed monster from the
Sword-Worlds...."</p>

<p>"Shut the horrible man off,"
somebody was yelling, in competition
with the hypnotic scream of
the speaker.</p>

<p>The trouble was, they couldn't.
They could turn off the screen, but
Zaspar Makann would go on
screaming, and millions all over
the planet would still hear him.
Bentrik twiddled the selector. The
voice stuttered briefly, and then
came echoing out of the speaker,
but this time the pickup was somewhere
several hundred feet above a
great open park. It was densely
packed with people, most of them
wearing clothes a farm tramp on
Gram wouldn't be found dead in,
but here and there among them
were blocks of men in what was
almost but not quite military uniform,
each with a short and thick
swagger-stick with a knobbed head.
Across the park, in the distance,
the head and shoulders of Zaspar
Makann loomed a hundred feet
high in a huge screen. Whenever he
stopped for breath, a shout would
go up, beginning with the blocks of
uniformed men:</p>

<p>"<i>Makann! Makann! Makann the
Leader! Makann to Power!</i>"</p>

<p>"You even let him have a private
army?" he asked the Crown Prince.</p>

<p>"Oh, those silly buffoons and
their musical-comedy uniforms,"
the Crown Prince shrugged. "They
aren't armed."</p>

<p>"Not visibly," he granted. "Not
yet."</p>

<p>"I don't know where they'd get
arms."</p>

<p>"No, Your Highness," Prince
Bentrik said. "Neither do I. That's
what I'm worried about."</p>




<!--se:split--><h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXII</h2>


<p>He succeeded, the next morning,
in convincing everybody that he
wanted to be alone for a while, and
was sitting in a garden, watching
the rainbows in the midst of a big
waterfall across the valley. Elaine
would have liked that, but she
wasn't with him, now.</p>

<p>Then he realized that somebody
was speaking to him, in a small,
bashful voice. He turned, and saw
a little girl in shorts and a sleeveless
jacket, holding in her arms a long-haired
blond puppy with big ears
and appealing eyes.</p>

<p>"Hello, both of you," he said.</p>

<p>The puppy wriggled and tried to
lick the girl's face.</p>

<p>"Don't, Mopsy. We want to talk
to this gentleman," she said. "Are
you really and truly the Space
Viking?"</p>

<p>"Really and truly. And who are
you two?"</p>

<p>"I'm Myrna. And this is Mopsy."</p>

<p>"Hello, Myrna. Hello, Mopsy."</p>

<p>Hearing his name, the puppy
wriggled again and dropped from
the child's arms; after a brief hesitation,
he came over and jumped onto
Trask's lap, licking his face. While
he petted the dog, the girl came
over and sat on the bench beside
him.
</p>

<p>"Mopsy likes you," she said.
After a moment, she added: "I like
you, too."</p>

<p>"And I like you," he said.
"Would you want to be my girl?
You know, a Space Viking has to
have a girl on every planet. How
would you like to be my girl on
Marduk?"</p>

<p>Myrna thought that over carefully.
"I'd like to, but I couldn't.
You see, I'm going to have to be
Queen, some day."</p>

<p>"Oh?"</p>

<p>"Yes. Grandpa is King now, and
when he's through being King,
Pappa will have to be King, and
then when he's through being
King, I can't be King because I'm
a girl, so I'll have to be Queen.
And I can't be anybody's girl, because
I'm going to have to marry
somebody I don't know, for reasons
of state." She thought some more,
and lowered her voice. "I'll tell
you a secret. I am a Queen now."</p>

<p>"Oh, you are?"</p>

<p>She nodded. "We are Queen, in
our own right, of our Royal Bedroom,
our Royal Playroom, and our
Royal Bathroom. And Mopsy is
our faithful subject."</p>

<p>"Is Your Majesty absolute ruler
of these domains?"</p>

<p>"No," she said disgustedly. "We
must at all times defer to our Royal
Ministers, just like Grandpa has to.
That means, I have to do just what
they tell me to. That's Lady
Valerie, and Margot, and Dame
Eunice, and Sir Thomas. But
Grandpa says they are good and
wise ministers. Are you really a
Prince? I didn't know Space Vikings
were Princes."</p>

<p>"Well, my King says I am. And
I am ruler of my planet, and I'll
tell you a secret. I don't have to do
what anybody tells me."</p>

<p>"Gee! Are you a tyrant? You're
awfully big and strong. I'll bet
you've slain just hundreds of cruel
and wicked enemies."</p>

<p>"Thousands, Your Majesty."</p>

<p>He wished that weren't literally
true; he didn't know how many of
them had been little girls like
Myrna and little dogs like Mopsy.
He found that he was holding both
of them tightly. The girl was saying:
"But you feel bad about it."
These children must be telepaths!</p>

<p>"A Space Viking who is also a
Prince must do many things he
doesn't want to do."</p>

<p>"I know. So does a Queen. I hope
Grandpa and Pappa don't get
through being King for just years
and years." She looked over his
shoulder. "Oh! And now I suppose
I've got to do something else I
don't want to. Lessons, I bet."</p>

<p>He followed her eyes. The girl
who had been his dinner companion
was approaching; she wore
a wide sunshade hat, and a gown
that trailed filmy gauze like sunset-colored
mist. There was another
woman, in the garb of an upper
servant, with her.</p>

<p>"Lady Valerie and who else?"
he whispered.</p>

<p>"Margot. She's my nurse. She's
awful strict, but she's nice."</p>

<p>"Prince Trask, has Her Highness
been bothering you?" Lady Valerie
asked.</p>

<p>"Oh, far from it." He rose, still
holding the funny little dog. "But
you should say, Her Majesty. She
has informed me that she is sovereign
of three princely domains. And
of one dear loving subject." He
gave the subject back to the sovereign.</p>

<p>"You should not have told
Prince Trask that," Lady Valerie
chided. "When Your Majesty is
outside her domains, Your Majesty
must remain incognito. Now, Your
Majesty must go with the Minister
of the Bedchamber; the Minister of
Education awaits an audience."</p>

<p>"Arithmetic, I bet. Well, good-by,
Prince Trask. I hope I can see
you again. Say good-by, Mopsy."</p>

<p>She went away with her nurse,
the little dog looking back over her
shoulder.</p>

<p>"I came out to enjoy the gardens
alone," he said, "and now I find I'd
rather enjoy them in company. If
your Ministerial duties do not
forbid, could you be the company?"</p>

<p>"But gladly, Prince Trask. Her
Majesty will be occupied with
serious affairs of state. Square root.
Have you seen the grottoes?
They're down this way."</p>

<hr/>

<p>That afternoon, one of the gentlemen-attendants
caught up with
him; Baron Cragdale would be
gratified if Prince Trask could find
time to talk with him privately.
Before they had talked more than
a few minutes, however, Baron
Cragdale abruptly became Crown
Prince Edvard.</p>

<p>"Prince Trask, Admiral Shefter
tells me that you and he are having
informal discussions about co-operation
against this mutual enemy
of ours, Dunnan. This is fine; it
has my approval, and the approval
of Prince Vandarvant, the Prime
Minister, and, I might add, that
of Goodman Mikhyl. I think it
ought to go further, though. A
formal treaty between Tanith and
Marduk would be greatly to the
advantage of both."</p>

<p>"I'd be inclined to think so,
Prince Edvard. But aren't you proposing
marriage on rather short
acquaintance? It's only been fifty
hours since the <i>Nemesis</i> orbited in
here."</p>

<p>"Well, we know a bit about you
and your planet beforehand. There's
a large Gilgamesher colony here.
You have a few on Tanith, haven't
you? Well, anything one Gilgamesher
knows, they all find out,
and ours are co-operative with
Naval intelligence."</p>

<p>That would be why Andray
Dunnan was having no dealings
with Gilgameshers. It would also
be what Zaspar Makann meant
when he ranted about the Gilgamesh
Interstellar Conspiracy.</p>

<p>"I can see where an arrangement
like that would be mutually advantageous.
I'd be quite in favor of
it. Co-operation against Dunnan,
of course, and reciprocal trade-rights
on each other's trade-planets,
and direct trade between Marduk
and Tanith. And Beowulf and Amaterasu
would come into it, too.
Does this also have the approval
of the Prime Minister and the
King?"</p>

<p>"Goodman Mikhyl's in favor of
it; there's a distinction between
him and the King, as you'll have
noticed. The King can't be in favor
of anything till the Assembly or
the Chancellor express an opinion.
Prince Vandarvant favors it personally;
as Prime Minister, he is
reserving his opinion. We'll have
to get the support of the Crown
Loyalist Party before he can take
an unequivocal position."</p>

<p>"Well, Baron Cragdale; speaking
as Baron Trask of Traskon, suppose
we just work out a rough outline
of what this treaty ought to be,
and then consult, unofficially, with
a few people whom you can trust,
and see what can be done about
presenting it to the proper government
officials...."</p>

<hr/>

<p>The Prime Minister came to
Cragdale that evening, heavily incognito
and accompanied by several
leaders of the Crown Loyalist
Party. In principle, they all favored
a treaty with Tanith. Politically,
they had doubts. Not before the
election; too controversial a subject.
"Controversial," it appeared,
was the dirtiest dirty-name anything
could be called on Marduk.
It would alienate the labor vote;
they'd think increased imports
would threaten employment in
Mardukan industries. Some of
the interstellar trading companies
would like a chance at the Tanith
planets; others would resent Tanith
ships being given access to theirs.
And Zaspar Makann's party were
already shrieking protests about
the <i>Nemesis</i> being repaired by the
Royal Navy.</p>

<p>And a couple of professors who
inclined toward Makann had introduced
a resolution calling for the
court-martial of Prince Bentrik and
an investigation of the loyalty of
Admiral Shefter. And somebody
else, probably a stooge of Makann's,
was claiming that Bentrik
had sold the <i>Victrix</i> to the Space
Vikings and that the films of the
battle of Audhumla were fakes,
photographed in miniature at the
Navy Moon Base.</p>

<p>Admiral Shefter, when Trask
flew in to see him the next day, was
contemptuous about this last.</p>

<p>"Ignore the whole bloody thing;
we get something like that before
every general election. On this
planet, you can always kick the
Gilgameshers and the Armed Forces
with impunity, neither have votes
and neither can kick back. The
whole thing'll be forgotten the
day after the election. It always is."</p>

<p>"That's if Makann doesn't win
the election," Trask qualified.</p>

<p>"That's no matter who wins the
election. They can't any of them
get along without the Navy, and
they bloody well know it."</p>

<p>Trask wanted to know if Intelligence
had been getting anything.</p>

<p>"Not on how Dunnan found out
the <i>Victrix</i> had been ordered to
Audhumla, no," Shefter said.
"There wasn't any secrecy about it;
at least a thousand people, from
myself down to the shoeshine boys,
could have known about it as soon
as the order was taped.</p>

<p>"As for the list of ships you gave
me, yes. One of them puts in to this
planet regularly; she spaced out
from here only yesterday morning.
The <i>Honest Horris</i>."</p>

<p>"Well, great Satan, haven't you
done anything?"</p>

<p>"I don't know if there's anything
we can do. Oh, we're investigating,
but.... You see, this ship first
showed up here four years ago,
commanded by some kind of a
Neobarb, not a Gilgamesher,
named Horris Sasstroff. He claimed
to be from Skathi; the locals there
have a few ships, the Space Vikings
had a base on Skathi about a hundred
or so years ago. Naturally,
the ship had no papers. Tramp trading
among the Neobarbs, it might
be years before you'd put in on a
planet where they'd ever heard of
ship's papers.</p>

<p>"The ship seems to have been in
bad shape, probably abandoned on
Skathi as junk a century ago and
tinkered up by the locals. She was
in here twice, according to the
commercial shipping records, and
the second time she was in too bad
shape to be moved out, and Sasstroff
couldn't pay to have her rebuilt,
so she was libeled
<!--Spelling changed to "libelled" in book;
in admiralty law, to bring a suit against someone.-->
for spaceport
charges and sold. Some one-lung
trading company bought her
and fixed her up a little; they went
bankrupt in a year or so, and she
was bought by another small company,
Startraders, Ltd., and they've
been using her on a milk-run to and
from Gimli. They seem to be a
legitimate outfit, but we're looking
into them. We're looking for Sasstroff,
too, but we haven't been able
to find him."</p>

<p>"If you have a ship out Gimli
way, you might find out if anybody
there knows anything about her.
You may discover that she hasn't
been going there at all."</p>

<p>"We might, at that," Shefter
agreed. "We'll just find out."</p>

<hr/>

<p>Everybody at Cragdale knew
about the projected treaty with
Tanith by the morning after Trask's
first conversation with Prince Edvard
on the subject. The Queen of
the Royal Bedroom, the Royal
Playroom and the Royal Bathroom
was insisting that her domains
should have a treaty with Tanith,
too.</p>

<p>It was beginning to look to
Trask as though that would be the
only treaty he'd sign on Marduk,
and he was having his doubts
about that.</p>

<p>"Do you think it would be
wise?" he asked Lady Valerie
Alvarath. The Queen of three rooms
and one four-footed subject had
already decreed that Lady Valerie
should be the Space Viking Prince's
girl on the planet of Marduk.
"If it got out, these People's Welfare
lunatics would pick it up and
twist it into evidence of some kind
of a sinister plot."</p>

<p>"Oh, I believe Her Majesty could
sign a treaty with Prince Trask,"
Her Majesty's Prime Minister decided.
"But it would have to be
kept very secret."</p>

<p>"Gee!" Myrna's eyes widened.
"A real secret treaty; just like the
wicked rulers of the old dictatorship!"
She hugged her subject
ecstatically. "I'll bet Grandpa
doesn't even have any secret treaties!"</p>

<hr/>

<p>In a few days, everybody on
Marduk knew that a treaty with
Tanith was being discussed. If they
didn't, it was no fault of Zaspar
Makann's party, who seemed to
command a disconcertingly large
number of telecast stations, and
who drenched the ether with horror
stories of Space Viking atrocities
and denunciations of carefully unnamed
traitors surrounding the
King and the Crown Prince who
were about to betray Marduk to
rapine and plunder. The leak evidently
did not come from Cragdale,
for it was generally believed that
Trask was still at the Royal Palace
in Malverton. At least, that was
where the Makannists were demonstrating
against him.</p>

<p>He watched such a demonstration
by screen; the pickup was
evidently on one of the landing
stages of the palace, overlooking
the wide parks surrounding it. They
were packed almost solid with
people, surging forward toward the
thin cordon of police. The front of
the mob looked like a checkerboard&mdash;a
block in civilian dress, then a
block in the curiously effeminate-looking
uniforms of Zaspar Makann's
People's Watchmen, then
more in ordinary garb, and more
People's Watchmen. Over the heads
of the crowds, at intervals, floated
small contragravity lifters on which
were mounted the amplifiers that
were bellowing:</p>

<p>"SPACE VI-KING&mdash;GO HOME!
SPACE VI-KING&mdash;GO HOME!"</p>

<p>The police stood motionless, at
parade rest; the mob surged closer.
When they were fifty yards away,
the blocks of People's Watchmen
ran forward, then spread out until
they formed a line six deep across
the entire front; other blocks, from
the rear, pushed the ordinary demonstrators
aside and took their
place. Hating them more every
second, Trask grudged approval of
a smart and disciplined maneuver.
How long, he wondered, had they
been drilling in that sort of tactics?
Without stopping, they continued
their advance on the police, who
had now shifted their stance.</p>

<p>"SPACE VI-KING&mdash;GO HOME!
SPACE VI-KING&mdash;GO HOME!"</p>

<p>"Fire!" he heard himself yelling.
"Don't let them get any closer,
fire now!"</p>

<p>They had nothing to fire with;
they had only truncheons, no better
weapons than the knobbed swagger-sticks
of the People's Watchmen.
They simply disappeared,
after a brief flurry of blows, and the
Makann storm-troopers continued
their advance.</p>

<p>And that was that. The gates of
the Palace were shut; the mob,
behind a front of Makann People's
Watchmen, surged up to them and
stopped. The loud-speakers bellowed
on, reiterating their four-word
chant.</p>

<p>"Those police were murdered,"
he said. "They were murdered by
the man who ordered them out
there unarmed."</p>

<p>"That would be Count Naydnayr,
the Minister of Security,"
somebody said.</p>

<p>"Then he's the one you want to
hang for it."</p>

<p>"What else would you have
done?" Crown Prince Edvard challenged.</p>

<p>"Put up about fifty combat cars.
Drawn a deadline, and opened
machine-gun fire as soon as the mob
crossed it, and kept on firing till the
survivors turned tail and ran. Then
sent out more cars, and shot everybody
wearing a People's Watchmen
uniform, all over town. Inside
forty-eight hours, there'd be no
People's Welfare party, and no
Zaspar Makann either."</p>

<p>The Crown Prince's face stiffened.
"That may be the way you do
things in the Sword-Worlds, Prince
Trask. It's not the way we do
things here on Marduk. Our government
does not propose to be
guilty of shedding the blood of its
people."</p>

<p>He had it on the tip of his tongue
to retort that if they didn't, the
people would end by shedding
theirs. Instead, he said softly:</p>

<p>"I'm sorry, Prince Edvard. You
had a wonderful civilization here
on Marduk. You could have made
almost anything of it. But it's too
late now. You've torn down the
gates; the barbarians are in."</p>





<!--se:split--><h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman"><!--Beginning of 4th installment.-->XXIII</h2>


<p>The colored turbulence faded into
the gray of hyperspace; five hundred
hours to Tanith. Guatt Kirbey was securing
his control-panel, happy to
return to his music. And Vann Larch
would go back to his paints and
brushes, and Alvyn Karffard to the
working model of whatever it was he
had left unfinished when the <i>Nemesis</i>
had emerged at the end of the
jump from Audhumla.</p>

<p>Trask went to the index of the
ship's library and punched for <i>History,
Old Terran</i>. There was plenty
of that, thanks to Otto Harkaman.
Then he punched for <i>Hitler, Adolf</i>.
Harkaman was right; anything that
could happen in a human society had
already happened, in one form or another,
somewhere and at some time.
Hitler could help him understand
Zaspar Makann.</p>

<p>By the time the ship came out,
with the yellow sun of Tanith in the
middle of the screen, he knew a
great deal about Hitler, occasionally
referred to as Schicklgruber, and he
understood, with sorrow, how the
lights of civilization on Marduk were
going out.</p>

<p>Beside the <i>Lamia</i>, stripped of her
Dillinghams and crammed with
heavy armament and detection instruments,
the <i>Space Scourge</i> and the
<i>Queen Flavia</i> were on off-planet
watch. There were half a dozen other
ships on orbit just above atmosphere;
a Gilgamesher, one of the Gram-Tanith
<!--"Gram-Marduk" in original.-->
freighters, a couple of free-lance
Space Vikings, and a new and
unfamiliar ship. When he asked the
moonbase who she was, he was told
that she was the <i>Sun Goddess</i>, Amaterasu.
That was, by almost a year,
better than he had expected of them.
Otto Harkaman was out in the <i>Corisande</i>,
raiding and visiting the
trade-planets.</p>

<p>He found his cousin, Nikkolay
Trask, at Rivington; when he inquired
about Traskon, Nikkolay
cursed.</p>

<p>"I don't know anything about
Traskon; I haven't anything to do
with Traskon, any more. Traskon is
now the personal property of our
well loved&mdash;very well loved&mdash;Queen
Evita. The Trasks don't own enough
land on Gram now for a family cemetery.
You see what you did?" he
added bitterly.</p>

<p>"You needn't rub it in, Nikkolay.
If I'd stayed on Gram, I'd have
helped put Angus on the throne, and
it would have been about the same in
the end."</p>

<p>"It could be a lot different," Nikkolay
said. "You could bring your
ships and men back to Gram and put
yourself on the throne."</p>

<p>"No; I'll never go back to Gram.
Tanith's my planet, now. But I will
renounce my allegiance to Angus. I
can trade on Morglay or Joyeuse or
Flamberge just as easily."</p>

<p>"You won't have to; you can trade
with Newhaven and Bigglersport.
Count Lionel and Duke Joris are
both defying Angus; they've refused
to furnish him men, they've driven
out his tax collectors, those they
haven't hanged, and they're building
ships of their own. Angus is building
ships, too. I don't know whether
he's going to use them to fight Bigglersport
and Newhaven, or attack
you, but there's going to be a war before
another year's out."</p>

<p>The <i>Goodhope</i> and the <i>Speedwell</i>,
he found, had gone back to Gram.
They were commanded by men who
had come into favor at the court of
King Angus recently. The <i>Black Star</i>
and the <i>Queen Flavia</i>&mdash;whose captain
had contemptuously ignored an
order from Gram to re-christen her
<i>Queen Evita</i>&mdash;had remained. They
were his ships, not King Angus'. The
captain of the merchantman from
Wardshaven now on orbit refused to
take a cargo to Newhaven; he had
been chartered by King Angus, and
would take orders from no one else.</p>

<p>"All right," Trask told him. "This
is your last voyage here. You bring
that ship back under Angus of
Wardshaven's charter and we'll fire
on her."</p>

<p>Then he had the regalia he had
worn in his last audiovisual to Angus
dusted off. At first, he had decided to
proclaim himself King of Tanith.
Lord Valpry, Baron Rathmore and
his cousin all advised against it.</p>

<p>"Just call yourself Prince of Tanith,"
Valpry said. "The title won't
make any difference in your authority
here, and if you do lay claim to
the throne of Gram, nobody can say
you're a foreign king trying to annex
the planet."</p>

<p>He had no intention of doing anything
of the kind, but Valpry was
quite in earnest.</p>

<p>So he sat on his throne, as sovereign
Prince of Tanith, and renounced
his allegiance to "Angus, Duke of
Wardshaven, self-styled King of
Gram." They sent it back on the otherwise
empty freighter. Another copy
went to the Count of Newhaven,
along with a cargo in the <i>Sun Goddess</i>,
the first non-Space-Viking ship
into Gram from the Old Federation.</p>

<hr/>

<p>Seven hundred and fifty hours after
the return of the <i>Nemesis</i>, the
<i>Corisande II</i> emerged from her last
microjump, and immediately Harkaman
began hearing of the Battle of
Audhumla and the destruction of the
<i>Yo-Yo</i> and the <i>Enterprise</i>. At first,
he merely reported a successful raiding
voyage, from which he was bringing
rich booty. Oddly varigated
booty, it was remarked, when he began
itemizing it.</p>

<p>"Why, yes," he replied. "Secondhand
booty. I raided Dagon for it."</p>

<p>Dagon was a Space Viking base
planet, occupied by a character
named Fedrig Barragon. A number
of ships operated from it, including a
couple commanded by Barragon's
half-breed sons.</p>

<p>"Barragon's ships were raiding one
of our planets," Harkaman said.
"Ganpat. They looted a couple of
cities, destroyed one, killed a lot of
the locals. I found out about it from
Captain Ravallo of the <i>Black Star</i>, on
Indra; he'd just been from Ganpat.
Beowulf wasn't too far out of the
way, so we put in there, and found
the <i>Grendelsbane</i> just ready to space
out." The <i>Grendelsbane</i> was the second
of Beowulf's ships, sister to the
<i>Viking's Gift</i>. "So she joined us, and
the three of us went to Dagon. We
blew up one of Barragon's ships, and
put the other one down out of commission,
and then we sacked his base.
There was a Gilgamesher colony
there; we didn't bother them. They'll
tell what we did, and why."</p>

<p>"That should furnish Prince Viktor
of Xochitl something to ponder,"
Trask said. "Where are the other
ships, now?"</p>

<p>"The <i>Grendelsbane</i> went back to
Beowulf; she'll stop at Amaterasu to
do a little trading on the way. The
<i>Black Star</i> went to Xochitl. Just a
friendly visit, to say hello to Prince
Viktor for you. Ravallo has a lot of
audiovisuals we made during the Dagon
Operation. Then she's going to
Jagannath to visit Nikky Gratham."</p>

<hr/>

<p>Harkaman approved his attitude
and actions with regard to King
Angus.</p>

<p>"We don't need to do business with
the Sword-Worlds at all. We have
our own industries, we can produce
what we need, and we can trade with
Beowulf and Amaterasu, and with
Xochitl and Jagannath and Hoth, if
we can make any sort of agreement
with them; everybody agrees to let
everybody else's trade-planets alone.
It's too bad you couldn't get some
kind of an agreement with Marduk."
Harkaman regretted that for a few
seconds, and then shrugged. "Our
grandchildren, if any, will probably
be raiding Marduk."</p>

<p>"You think it'll be like that?"</p>

<p>"Don't you? You were there; you
saw what's happening. The barbarians
are rising; they have a leader,
and they're uniting. Every society
rests on a barbarian base. The people
who don't understand civilization,
and wouldn't like it if they did. The
hitchhikers. The people who create
nothing, and who don't appreciate
what others have created for them,
and who think civilization is something
that just exists and that all they
need to do is enjoy what they can understand
of it&mdash;luxuries, a high living
standard, and easy work for high
pay. Responsibilities? Phooey! What
do they have a government for?"</p>

<p>Trask nodded. "And now, the
hitchhikers think they know more
about the car than the people who
designed it, so they're going to grab
the controls. Zaspar Makann says
they can, and he's the Leader." He
poured a drink from a decanter that
had been looted on Pushan; there
was a planet where a republic had
been overthrown in favor of a dictatorship
four centuries ago, and the
planetary dictatorship had fissioned
into a dozen regional dictatorships,
and now they were down to the peasant-village
and handcraft-industry
level. "I don't understand it, though.
I was reading about Hitler, on the
way home. I wouldn't be surprised if
Zaspar Makann had been reading
about Hitler, too. He's using all Hitler's
tricks. But Hitler came to power
in a country which had been impoverished
by a military defeat. Marduk
hasn't fought a war in almost two
generations, and that one was a farce."</p>

<p>"It wasn't the war that put Hitler
into power. It was the fact that the
ruling class of his nation, the people
who kept things running, were discredited.
The masses, the homemade
barbarians, didn't have anybody to
take their responsibilities for them.
What they have on Marduk is a ruling
class that has been discrediting
itself. A ruling class that's ashamed
of its privileges and shirks its duties.
A ruling class that has begun to
believe that the masses are just as
good as they are, which they manifestly
are not. And a ruling class that
won't use force to maintain its position.
And they have a democracy,
and they are letting the enemies of
democracy shelter themselves behind
democratic safeguards."</p>

<p>"We don't have any of this democracy
in the Sword-Worlds, if that's
the word for it," he said. "And our
ruling class aren't ashamed of their
power, and our people aren't hitchhikers,
and as long as they get decent
treatment they don't try to run
things. And we're not doing so well."</p>

<p>The Morglay dynastic war of a
couple of centuries ago, still sputtering
and smoking. The Oskarsan-Elmersan
War on Durendal, into which
Flamberge and now Joyeuse had intruded.
And the situation on Gram,
fast approaching critical mass. Harkaman
nodded agreement.</p>

<p>"You know why? Our rulers are
the barbarians among us. There isn't
one of them&mdash;Napolyon of Flamberge,
Rodolf of Excalibur, or Angus
of about half of Gram&mdash;who is devoted
to civilization or anything else
outside himself, and that's the mark
of the barbarian."</p>

<p>"What are you devoted to, Otto?"</p>

<p>"You. You are my chieftain. That's
another mark of the barbarian."</p>

<hr/>

<p>Before he had left Marduk, Admiral
Shefter had ordered a ship to
Gimli to check on the <i>Honest Horris</i>;
a few men and a pinnace would be
left behind to contact any ship from
Tanith. He sent Boake Valkanhayn
off in the <i>Space Scourge</i>.</p>

<p>Lionel of Newhaven's <i>Blue Comet</i>
came in from Gram with a cargo of
general merchandise. Her captain
wanted fissionables and gadolinium;
Count Lionel was building more
ships. There was a rumor that Omfray
of Glaspyth was laying claim to
the throne of Gram, in the right of
his great-grandmother's sister, who
had been married to the great-grandfather
of Duke Angus. It was a completely
trivial and irrelevant claim,
but the story was that it would be


supported by King Konrad of Haulteclere.</p>

<p>Immediately, Baron Rathmore,
Lord Valpry, Lothar Ffayle and the
other Gram people began clamoring
that he should go back with a fleet and
seize the throne for himself. Harkaman,
Valkanhayn, Karffard and the
other Space Vikings were as
vehement against it. Harkaman had
the loss of the other <i>Corisande</i> on
Durendal to remember, and the others
wanted no part in Sword-World
squabbles, and there was renewed
agitation that he should start calling
himself King of Tanith.</p>

<p>He refused to do either, which left
both parties dissatisfied. So partisan
politics had finally come to Tanith.
Maybe that was another milestone of
progress.</p>

<p>And there was the Treaty of Khepera,
between the Princely State of
Tanith, the Commonwealth of Beowulf,
and the Planetary League of
Amaterasu. The Kheperans agreed to
allow bases on their planet, to furnish
workers, and to send students to
school on all three planets. Tanith,
Beowulf and Amaterasu obligated
themselves to joint defense of Khepera,
to free trade among themselves,
and to render one another
armed assistance.</p>

<p>That <i>was</i> a milestone of progress,
and no argument about it.</p>


<p>The <i>Space Scourge</i> returned from
Gimli, and Valkanhayn reported that
nobody on the planet had ever seen
or heard of the <i>Honest Horris</i>. They
had found a Mardukan Navy ship's
pinnace there, manned entirely by
officers, some of them Navy Intelligence.
According to them, the investigation
into the activities of that
ship had come to an impasse. The
ostensible owners claimed, and had
papers to prove it, that they had chartered
her to a private trader, and he
claimed, and had papers to prove it,
that he was a citizen of the Planetary
Republic of Aton, and as soon as
they began questioning him, he was
rescued by the Atonian ambassador,
who lodged a vehement protest with
the Mardukan Foreign Ministry. Immediately,
the People's Welfare Party
had leaped into the incident and
branded the investigation as an unwarranted
persecution of a national
of a friendly power at the instigation
of corrupt tools of the Gilgamesh
Interstellar Conspiracy.</p>

<p>"So that's it," Valkanhayn finished.
"It seems they're having an
election and they're afraid to antagonize
anybody who might have a vote.
So the Navy had to drop the investigation.
Everybody on Marduk's
scared of this Makann. You think
there might be some tie-up between
him and Dunnan?"</p>

<p>"The idea's occurred to me. Have
there been any more raids on Marduk
trade-planets since the Battle of
Audhumla?"</p>

<p>"A couple. The <i>Bolide</i> was on
Audhumla a while ago. There were
a couple of Mardukan ships there,
and they had the <i>Victrix</i> fixed up
enough to do some fighting. They
ran the <i>Bolide</i> out."</p>

<p>A study of the time between the
destruction of the <i>Enterprise</i> and
<i>Yo-Yo</i> and the appearance of the
<i>Bolide</i> could give them a limiting
radius around Audhumla. It did; seven
hundred light-years, which also
included Tanith.</p>

<p>So he sent Harkaman in the <i>Corisande</i>
and Ravallo in the <i>Black Star</i>
to visit the planets Marduk traded
with, looking for Dunnan ships and
exchanging information and assistance
with the Royal Mardukan Navy.
Almost at once, he regretted it; the
next Gilgamesher into orbit on Tanith
brought a story that Prince Viktor
was collecting a fleet on Xochitl. He
sent warnings off to Amaterasu and
Beowulf and Khepera.</p>

<p>A ship came in from Bigglersport,
a heavily armed chartered freighter.
There was sporadic fighting in a dozen
places on Gram, now&mdash;resistance
to efforts on the part of King Angus
to collect taxes, and raids by unidentified
persons on estates confiscated
from alleged traitors and given to
Garvan Spasso, who had now been
promoted from Baron to Count. And
Rovard Grauffis was dead; poisoned,
everybody said, either by Spasso or
Queen Evita or both. Even with the
threat from Xochitl, some of the
former Wardshaven nobles began
talking about sending ships to Gram.</p>

<p>Less than a thousand hours after he
had left, Ravallo was back in the
<i>Black Star</i>.</p>

<p>"I went to Gimli, and I wasn't
there fifty hours before a Mardukan
Navy ship came in. They were glad
to see me; it saved them sending off
a pinnace for Tanith. They had news
for you, and a couple of passengers."</p>

<p>"Passengers?"</p>

<p>"Yes. You'll see who they are when
they come down. And don't let anybody
with side-whiskers and buttoned-up
coats see them," Ravallo
said. "What those people know gets
all over the place before long."</p>

<hr/>

<p>The visitors were Lucile, Princess
Bentrik, and her son, the young
Count of Ravary. They dined with
Trask; only Captain Ravallo was also
present.</p>

<p>"I didn't want to leave my husband,
and I didn't want to come here
and impose myself and Steven on
you, Prince Trask," she began, "but
he insisted. We spent the whole voyage
to Gimli concealed in the captain's
quarters; only a few of the officers
knew we were aboard."</p>

<p>"Makann won the election. Is that
it?" he asked. "And Prince Bentrik
doesn't want to risk you and Steven
being used as hostages?"</p>

<p>"That's it," she said. "He didn't
really win the election, but he might
as well have. Nobody has a majority
of seats in the Chamber of Representatives
but he's formed a coalition
with several of the splinter parties,
and I'm ashamed to say that a number
of Crown Loyalist members&mdash;Crowd
of Disloyalists, I call them&mdash;are voting
with him, now. They've coined
some ridiculous phrase about the
'wave of the future,' whatever that
means."</p>

<p>"If you can't lick them, join them,"
Trask said.</p>

<p>"If you can't lick them, lick their
boots," the Count of Ravary put in.</p>

<p>"My son is a trifle bitter," Princess
Bentrik said. "I must confess to a
trace of bitterness, too."</p>

<p>"Well, that's the Representatives,"
Trask said. "What about the rest of
the government?"</p>

<p>"With the splinter-party and Disloyalist
support, they got a majority
of seats in the Delegates. Most of
them would have indignantly denied,
a month before, having any connection
with Makann, but a hundred out
of a hundred and twenty are his supporters.
Makann, of course, is Chancellor."</p>

<p>"And who is Prime Minister?" he
asked. "Andray Dunnan?"</p>

<p>She looked slightly baffled for an
instant then said, "Oh. No. The
Prime Minister is Crown Prince Edvard.
No; Baron Cragdale. That isn't
a royal title, so by some kind of a fiction
I can't pretend to understand he
is not Prime Minister as a member
of the Royal Family."</p>

<p>"If you can't ..." the boy started.</p>

<p>"Steven! I forbid you to say that
about ... Baron Cragdale. He believes,
very sincerely, that the election
was an expression of the will of
the people, and that it is his duty to
bow to it."</p>

<p>He wished Otto Harkaman were
there. He could probably name, without
stopping for breath, a hundred
great nations that went down into
rubble because their rulers believed
that they should bow instead of rule,
and couldn't bring themselves to
shed the blood of their people. Edvard
would have been a fine and admirable
man, as a little country
baron. Where he was, he was a disaster.</p>

<p>He asked if the People's Watchman
had dragged their guns out from
under the bed and started carrying
them in public yet.</p>

<p>"Oh, yes. You were quite right;
they were armed, all the time. Not
just small arms; combat vehicles and
heavy weapons. As soon as the new
government was formed, they were
given status as a part of the Planetary
Armed Forces. They have taken
over every police station on the planet."</p>

<p>"And the King?"</p>

<p>"Oh, he carries on, and shrugs and
says, 'I just reign here.' What else
can he do? We've been whittling
down and filching away the powers
of the Throne for the last three centuries."</p>

<p>"What is Prince Bentrik doing,
and why did he think there was danger
that you two would be used as
hostages?"</p>

<p>"He's going to fight," she said.
"Don't ask me how, or what with.
Maybe as a guerrilla in the mountains,
I don't know. But if he can't
lick them, he won't join them. I wanted
to stay with him and help him;
he told me I could help him best by
placing myself and Steven where he
wouldn't worry about us."</p>

<p>"I wanted to stay," the boy said. "I
could have fought with him. But he
said that I must take care of Mother.
And if he were killed, I must be able
to avenge him."</p>

<p>"You talk like a Sword-Worlder; I
told you that once before." He hesitated,
then turned again to Princess
Bentrik. "How is little Princess Myrna?"
he asked, and then, trying to be
casual, added, "and Lady Valerie?"</p>

<p>She seemed so clearly real and
present to him, blue eyes and space-black
hair, more real than Elaine had
been to him for years.</p>

<p>"They're at Cragdale; they'll be
safe there. I hope."</p>




<!--se:split--><h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXIV</h2>


<p>Attempting to conceal the presence
on Tanith of Prince Bentrik's
wife and son was pushing caution beyond
necessity. Admitted that the
news would leak back to Marduk via
Gilgamesh, it was over seven hundred
light-years to the latter and almost
a thousand from there to the
former. Better that Princess Lucile
should enjoy Rivington society, such
as it was, and escape, for a moment
now and then, from anxiety about
her husband. At ten&mdash;no, almost
twelve; it had been a year and a half
since Trask had left Marduk&mdash;the
boy Count of Ravary was more easily
diverted. At last, he was among real
Space Vikings, on a Space Viking
planet, and he was trying to be everywhere
and see everything at once. No
doubt he would be imagining himself
a Space Viking, returning to
Marduk with a vast armada to rescue
his father and the King from Zaspar
Makann.</p>

<p>Trask was satisfied with that; as a
host he left much to be desired. He
had his worries, too, and all of them
bore the same name: Prince Viktor
of Xochitl. He went over with Manfred
Ravallo everything the captain
of the <i>Black Star</i> could tell him. He
had talked once with Viktor; the lord
of Xochitl had been coldly polite and
noncommittal. His subordinates had
been frankly hostile. There had been
five ships on orbit or landed at Viktor's
spaceport beside the usual Gilgameshers
and itinerant traders, two
of them Viktor's own, and a big
armed freighter had come in from
Haulteclere as the <i>Black Star</i> was
leaving. There was considerable activity
at the shipyards and around the
spaceport, as though in preparation
for something on a large scale.</p>

<p>Xochitl was a thousand light-years
from Tanith. He rejected immediately
the idea of launching a
preventative attack; his ships might
reach Xochitl to find it undefended,
and then return to find Tanith devastated.
Things like that had happened
in space-war. The only thing
to do was sit tight, defend Tanith
when Viktor attacked, and then
counterattack if he had any ships
left by that time. Prince Viktor was
probably reasoning in the same way.</p>

<p>He had no time to think about
Andray Dunnan, except, now and
then, to wish that Otto Harkaman
would stop thinking about him and
bring the <i>Corisande</i> home. He needed
that ship on Tanith, and the wits
and courage of her commander.</p>

<p>More news&mdash;Gilgamesh sources&mdash;came
in from Xochitl. There were
only two ships, both armed merchantmen,
on the planet. Prince Viktor
had spaced out with the rest an estimated
two thousand hours before the
story reached him. That was twice as
long as it would take the Xochitl armada
to reach Tanith. He hadn't
gone to Beowulf; that was only sixty-five
hours from Tanith and they
would have heard about it long ago.
Or Amaterasu, or Khepera. How
many ships he had was a question;
not fewer than five, and possibly
more. He could have slipped into
the Tanith system and hidden his
ships on one of the outer uninhabitable
planets. He sent Valkanhayn
and Ravallo microjumping their
ships from one to another to check.
They returned to report in the negative.
At least, Viktor of Xochitl wasn't
camped inside their own system,
waiting for them to leave Tanith
open to attack.</p>

<p>But he was somewhere, and up to
nothing even resembling good, and
there was no possible way of guessing
when his ships would be emerging
on Tanith. The only thing to do
was wait for him. When he did,
Trask was confident that he would
emerge from hyperspace into serious
trouble. He had the <i>Nemesis</i>, the
<i>Space Scourge</i>, the <i>Black Star</i> and
<i>Queen Flavia</i>, the strongly rebuilt
<i>Lamia</i>, and several independent
Space Viking ships, among them the
<i>Damnthing</i> of his friend Roger-fan-Morvill
Esthersan, who had volunteered
to stay and help in the defense.
This, of course, was not pure altruism.
If Viktor attacked and had his
fleet blown to Em-See-Square, Xochitl
would lie open and unprotected,
and there was enough loot on
Xochitl to cram everybody's ships.
Everybody's ships who had ships
when the Battle of Tanith was over,
of course.</p>

<p>He was apologetic to Princess Bentrik:</p>

<p>"I'm very sorry you jumped out of
Zaspar Makann's frying pan into
Prince Viktor's fire," he began.</p>

<p>She laughed at that. "I'll take my
chances on the fire. I seem to see a
lot of good firemen around. If there
is a battle you will see that Steven's
in a safe place, won't you?"</p>

<p>"In a space attack, there are no
safe places. I'll keep him with me."</p>

<p>The young Count of Ravary wanted
to know which ship he would
serve on when the attack came.</p>

<p>"Well, you won't be on any ship,
Count. You'll be on my staff."</p>

<hr/>

<p>Two days later, the <i>Corisande</i>
came out of hyperspace. Harkaman
was guardedly noncommittal by
screen. Trask took a landing craft
and went out to meet the ship.</p>

<p>"Marduk doesn't like us, any
more," Harkaman told him. "They
have ships on all their trade-planets,
and they all have orders to fire on
any, repeat any, Space Vikings, including
the ships of the self-styled
Prince of Tanith. I got this from
Captain Garravay of the <i>Vindex</i>.
After we were through talking, we
fought a nice little ship-to-ship action
for him to make films of. I don't
think anybody could see anything
wrong with it."</p>

<p>"This order came from Makann?"</p>

<p>"From the Admiral commanding.
He isn't your friend Shefter; Shefter
retired on account of quote ill-health
unquote. He is now in a quote
hospital unquote."</p>

<p>"Where's Prince Bentrik?"</p>

<p>"Nobody knows. Charges of high
treason were brought against him,
and he just vanished. Gone underground,
or secretly arrested and executed;
take your choice."</p>

<p>He wondered just what he'd tell
Princess Lucile and Count Steven.</p>

<p>"They have ships on all the planets
they trade with. Fourteen of
them. That isn't to catch Dunnan.
That's to disperse the Navy away
from Marduk. They don't trust the
Navy. Is Prince Edvard still Prime
Minister?"</p>

<p>"Yes, as of Garravay's last information.
It seems Makann is behaving
in a scrupulously legal manner, outside
of making his People's Watchmen
part of the armed forces. Protesting
his devotion to the King every
time he opens his mouth."</p>

<p>"When will the fire be, I wonder?"</p>

<p>"Huh? Oh yes, you were reading
up on Hitler. That I don't know.
Probably happened by now."</p>

<p>He just told Princess Lucile that
her husband had gone into hiding;
he couldn't be sure whether she was
relieved or more worried. The boy
was sure that he was doing something
highly romantic and heroic.</p>

<p>Some of the volunteers tired of
waiting, after another thousand hours,
and spaced out. The <i>Viking's Gift</i>
of Beowulf came in with a cargo,
and went on orbit after discharging
it to join the watch. A Gilgamesher
came in from Amaterasu and reported
everything quiet there; as soon as
her captain had sold his cargo, with
a minimum of haggling, he spaced
out again. His behavior convinced
everybody that the attack would come
in a matter of hours.</p>

<p>It didn't.</p>

<hr/>

<p>Three thousand hours had passed
since the first warning had reached
Tanith, that made five thousand
since Viktor's ships were supposed
to have left Xochitl. There were
those, Boake Valkanhayn among
them, who doubted, now, if he ever
had.</p>

<p>"The whole thing's just a big Gilgamesher
lie," he was declaring.
"Somebody&mdash;Nikky Gratham, or the
Everrards, or maybe Viktor himself&mdash;paid
them to tell us that, to pin
our ships down here. Or they made
it up themselves, so they could make
hay on our trade-planets."</p>

<p>"Let's go down to the Ghetto and
clean out the whole gang," somebody
else took up. "Anything one of
them's in, they're all in together."</p>

<p>"Nifflheim with that; let's all space
out for Xochitl," Manfred Ravallo
proposed. "We have enough ships to
lick them on Tanith, we have enough
to lick them on their own planet."</p>

<p>He managed to talk them out of
both courses of action&mdash;what was he,
anyhow; sovereign Prince of Tanith,
or the non-ruling King of Marduk,
or just the chieftain of a disciplineless
gang of barbarians? One of the
independents spaced out in disgust.
The next day, two others came in,
loaded with booty from a raid on
Braggi, and decided to stay around
for a while and see what happened.</p>

<p>And four days after that, a five-hundred-foot
hyperspace yacht, bearing
the daggers and chevrons of
Bigglersport, came in. As soon as she
was out of the last microjump, she
began calling by screen.</p>

<p>Trask didn't know the man who
was screening, but Hugh Rathmore
did; Duke Joris' confidential secretary.</p>

<p>"Prince Trask; I must speak to you
as soon as possible," he began, almost
stuttering. Whatever the urgency of
his mission, one would have thought
that a three-thousand-hour voyage
would have taken some of the edge
from it. "It is of the first importance."</p>

<p>"You are speaking to me. This
screen is reasonably secure. And if
it's of the first importance, the sooner
you tell me about it...."</p>

<p>"Prince Trask, you must come to
Gram, with every man and every
ship you can command. Satan only
knows what's happening there now,
but three thousand hours ago, when
the Duke sent me off, Omfray of
Glaspyth was landing on Wardshaven.
He has a fleet of eight ships, furnished
to him by his wife's kinsman, the
King of Haulteclere. They are commanded
by King Konrad's Space Viking
cousin, the Prince of Xochitl."</p>

<p>Then a look of shocked surprise
came into the face of the man in the
screen, and Trask wondered why, until
he realized that he had leaned
back in his chair and was laughing
uproariously. Before he could apologize,
the man in the screen had found
his voice.</p>

<p>"I know, Prince Trask; you have
no reason to think kindly of King
Angus&mdash;the former King Angus, or
maybe even the late King Angus, I
suppose he is now&mdash;but a murderer
like Omfray of Glaspyth...."</p>

<hr/>

<p>It took a little time to explain to
the confidential secretary of the Duke
of Bigglersport the humor of the situation.</p>

<p>There were others at Rivington to
whom it was not immediately evident.
The professional Space Vikings,
men like Valkanhayn and Ravallo
and Alvyn Karffard, were disgusted.
Here they'd been sitting, on combat
alert, all these months, and, if they'd
only known, they could have gone to
Xochitl and looted it clean long ago.
The Gram party were outraged. Angus
of Wardshaven had been bad
enough, with the hereditary taint of
the Mad Baron of Blackcliffe, and
Queen Evita and her rapacious family,
but even he was preferable to a
murderous villain&mdash;some even called
him a fiend in human shape&mdash;like
Omfray of Glaspyth.</p>

<p>Both parties, of course, were positive
as to where their Prince's duty
lay. The former insisted that everything
on Tanith that could be put
into hyperspace should be dispatched
at once to Xochitl, to haul back from
it everything except a few absolutely
immovable
natural features of
the planet. The latter
clamored, just as loudly and
passionately, that everybody
on Tanith who could pull a trigger
should be embarked at once on a
crusade for the deliverance of Gram.</p>


<p>"You don't want to do either, do
you?" Harkaman asked him, when
they were alone after the second day
of acrimony.</p>

<p>"Nifflheim, no! This crowd that
wants an attack on Xochitl; you
know what would happen if we did
that?" Harkaman was silent, waiting
for him to continue. "Inside a year,
four or five of these small planet-holders
like Gratham and the Everrards
would combine against us and
make a slag-pile out of Tanith."</p>

<p>Harkaman nodded agreement.

"Since we warned him the first time,
Viktor's kept his ships away from our
planets. If we attacked Xochitl now,
without provocation, nobody'd know
what to expect from us. People like
Nikky Gratham and Tobbin of Nergal
and the Everrards of Hoth get
nervous around unpredictable dangers,
and when they get nervous they
get trigger-happy." He puffed slowly
on his pipe and then said: "Then
you'll be going back to Gram."</p>

<p>"That doesn't follow; just because
Valkanhayn and Ravallo and that
crowd are wrong doesn't make Valpry
and Rathmore and Ffayle right.
You heard what I was telling those
very people at Karvall House, the
day I met you. And you've seen
what's been happening on Gram
since we came out here. Otto, the
Sword-Worlds are finished; they're
half decivilized now. Civilization is
alive and growing here on Tanith. I
want to stay here and help it grow."</p>

<p>"Look, Lucas," Harkaman said.
"You're Prince of Tanith, and I'm
only the Admiral. But I'm telling
you; you'll have to do something, or
this whole setup of yours will fall
apart. As it stands, you can attack
Xochitl and the Back-To-Gram party
would go along, or you can decide on
this crusade against Omfray of Glaspyth
and the Raid-Xochitl-Now party
would go along. But if you let this
go on much longer, you won't have
any influence over either party."</p>

<p>"And then I will be finished. And
in a few years, Tanith will be finished."
He rose and paced across the
room and back. "Well, I won't raid
Xochitl; I told you why, and you
agreed. And I won't spend the men
and ships and wealth of Tanith in
any Sword-World dynastic squabble.
Great Satan, Otto; you were in the
Durendal War. This is the same
thing, and it'll go on for another half
a century."</p>

<p>"Then what will you do?"</p>

<p>"I came out here after Andray
Dunnan, didn't I?" he asked.</p>

<p>"I'm afraid Ravallo and Valpry, or
even Valkanhayn and Morland, won't
be as interested in Dunnan as you
are."</p>

<p>"Then I will interest them in him.
Remember, I was reading up on Hitler,
coming in from Marduk? I will
tell them all a big lie. Such a big lie
that nobody will dare to disbelieve
it."</p>




<!--se:split--><h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXV</h2>


<p>"Do you think I was afraid of Viktor
of Xochitl?" he demanded. "Half
a dozen ships; we could make a new
Van Allen belt around Tanith of
them, with what we have here. Our
real enemy is on Marduk, not Xochitl;
his name's Zaspar Makann.
Zaspar Makann, and Andray Dunnan,
the man I came out from Gram
to hunt; they're in alliance, and I believe
Dunnan is on Marduk, himself,
now."</p>

<p>The delegation who had come out
from Gram in the yacht of the Duke
of Bigglersport were unimpressed.
Marduk was only a name to them,
one of the fabulous civilized Old
Federation planets no Sword-Worlder
had ever seen. Zaspar Makann
wasn't even that. And so much had
happened on Gram since the murder
of Elaine Karvall and the piracy of
the <i>Enterprise</i> that they had completely
forgotten Andray Dunnan.
That put them at a disadvantage. All
the people whom they were trying to
convince, the half-hundred members
of the new nobility of Tanith, spoke
a language they didn't understand.
They didn't even understand the
proposition, and couldn't argue
against it.</p>

<p>Paytrik Morland, who was Gram-born
and had been speaking for a
return in force to fight against Omfray
of Glaspyth and his supporters,
defected from them at once. He had
been on Marduk and knew who Zaspar
Makann was; he had made
friends with the Royal Navy officers,
and had been shocked to hear that
they were now enemies. Manfred Ravallo
and Boake Valkanhayn, among
the more articulate of the Raid-Xochitl-Now
party, snatched up the
idea and seemed convinced that
they'd thought of it themselves all
along. Valkanhayn had been on Gimli
and talked to Mardukan naval officers;
Ravallo had brought Princess
Bentrik to Tanith and heard her
stories on the voyage. They began
adducing arguments in support of
Trask's thesis. Of course Dunnan
and Makann were in collusion. Who
tipped Dunnan off that the <i>Victrix</i>
would be on Audhumla? Makann;
his spies in the Navy tipped him.
What about the <i>Honest Horris</i>; wasn't
Makann blocking any investigation
about her? Why was Admiral
Shefter retired as soon as Makann
got into power?</p>

<p>"Well, here; we don't know anything
about this Zaspar Makann," the
confidential secretary and spokesman
of the Duke of Bigglersport began.</p>

<p>"No, you don't," Otto Harkaman
told him. "I suggest you keep quiet
and listen, till you find out a little
about him."</p>

<p>"Why, I wouldn't be surprised if
Dunnan was on Marduk all the time
we were hunting for him," Valkanhayn
said.</p>

<p>Trask began to wonder. What
would Hitler have done if he'd told
one of his big lies, and then found
it turning into the truth? Maybe Makann
had been on Marduk.... No;
he couldn't have hidden half a dozen
ships on a civilized planet. Not even
at the bottom of an ocean.</p>

<p>"I wouldn't be surprised," Alvyn
Karffard was shouting, "if Andray
Dunnan <i>was</i> Zaspar Makann. I know
he doesn't look like Dunnan, we all
saw him on screen, but there's such a
thing as plastic surgery."</p>

<p>That was making the big lie just a
trifle too big. Zaspar Makann was six
inches shorter than Dunnan; there
are some things no plastic surgery
could do. Paytrik Morland, who had
known Dunnan and had seen Makann
on screen, ought to have known
that too, but he either didn't think of
it or didn't want to weaken a case he
had completely accepted.</p>

<p>"As far as I can find out, nobody
even heard of Makann till about five
years ago. That would be about the
time Dunnan would have arrived on
Marduk," he said.</p>

<p>By this time, the big room in
which they were meeting had become
a babel of voices, everybody trying to
convince everybody else that they'd
known it all along. Then the Back-To-Gram
party received its <i>coup-de-grace</i>;
Lothar Ffayle, to whom the
emissaries of Duke Joris had looked
for their strongest support, went
over.</p>

<p>"You people want us to abandon
a planet we've built up from nothing,
and all the time and money
we've invested in it, to go back to
Gram and pull your chestnuts out of
the fire? Gehenna with you! We're
staying here and defending our own
planet. If you're smart, you'll stay
here with us."</p>

<hr/>

<p>The Bigglersport delegation was
still on Tanith, trying to recruit mercenaries
from the King of Tradetown
and dickering with a Gilgamesher
to transport them to Gram,
when the big lie turned into something
like the truth.</p>

<p>The observation post on the Moon
of Tanith picked up an emergence
at twenty light-minutes due north of
the planet. Half an hour later, there
was another one at five light-minutes;
a very small one, and then a third at
two light-seconds, and this was detectable
by radar and microray as a
ship's pinnace. He wondered if something
had happened on Amaterasu or
Beowulf; somebody like Gratham or
the Everrards might have decided to
take advantage of the defensive mobilization
on Tanith. Then they
switched the call from the pinnace
over to his screen, and Prince Simon
Bentrik was looking out of it.</p>

<p>"I'm glad to see you! Your wife
and son are here, worried about you,
but safe and well." He turned to
shout to somebody to find young
Count Steven of Ravary and tell him
to tell his mother. "How are you?"</p>

<p>"I had a broken leg when I left
Moonbase, but that's mended on the
way," Bentrik said. "I have little
Princess Myrna aboard with me. For
all I know, she's Queen of Marduk,
now." He gulped slightly. "Prince
Trask, we've come as beggars. We're
begging help for our planet."</p>

<p>"You've come as honored guests,
and you'll get all the help we can
give you." He blessed the Xochitl invasion
scare, and the big lie which
was rapidly ceasing to be a lie; Tanith
had the ships and men and the
will to act. "What happened? Makann
deposed the King and took
over?"</p>

<p>It came to that, Bentrik told him.
It had started even before the election.
The People's Watchmen had
possessed weapons that had been
made openly and legally on Marduk
for trade to the Neobarbarian planets
and then clandestinely diverted
to secret People's Welfare arsenals.
Some of the police had gone over to
Makann; the rest had been terrorized
into inaction. There had been riots
fomented in working-class districts
of all the cities as pretexts for further
terrorization. The election had been
a farce of bribery and intimidation.
Even so, Makann's party had failed
of a complete majority in the Chamber
of Representatives, and had been
compelled to patch up a shady coalition
in order to elect a favorable
Chamber of Delegates.</p>

<p>"And, of course, they elected Makann
Chancellor; that did it," Bentrik
said. "All the opposition leaders
in the Chamber of Representatives
have been arrested, on all kinds
of ridiculous charges&mdash;sex-crimes,
receiving bribes, being in the pay of
foreign powers, nothing too absurd.
Then they rammed through a law
empowering the Chancellor to fill
vacancies in the Chamber of Representatives
by appointment."</p>

<p>"Why did the Crown Prince lend
himself to a thing like that?"</p>

<p>"He hoped that he could exercise
some control. The Royal Family is an
almost holy symbol to the people.
Even Makann was forced to pretend
loyalty to the King and the Crown
Prince...."</p>

<p>"It didn't work; he played right
into Makann's hands. What happened?"</p>

<p>The Crown Prince had been assassinated.
The assassin, an unknown
man believed to be a Gilgamesher,
had been shot to death by People's
Watchmen guarding Prince Edvard
at once. Immediately Makann had
seized the Royal Palace to protect the
King, and immediately there had
been massacres by People's Watchmen
everywhere. The Mardukan
Planetary Army had ceased to exist;
Makann's story was that there had
been a military plot against the King
and the government. Scattered over
the planet in small detachments, the
army had been wiped out in two
nights and a day. Now Makann was
recruiting it up again, exclusively
from the People's Welfare Party.</p>

<p>"You weren't just sitting on your
hands, were you?"</p>

<p>"Oh, no," Bentrik replied. "I was
doing something I wouldn't have
thought myself capable of, a few
years ago. Organizing a mutineering
conspiracy in the Royal Mardukan
Navy. After Admiral Shefter was
forcibly retired and shut up in an insane
asylum, I disappeared and
turned into a civilian contragravity-lifter
operator at the Malverton Navy
Yard. Finally, when I was suspected,
one of the officers&mdash;he was arrested
and tortured to death later&mdash;managed
to smuggle me onto a lighter
for the Moonbase. I was an orderly
in the hospital there. The day the
Crown Prince was murdered, we had
a mutiny of our own. We killed everybody
we even suspected of being
a Makannist. The Moonbase has
been under attack from the planet
ever since."</p>

<p>There was a stir behind him; turning,
he saw Princess Bentrik and the
boy enter the room. He rose.</p>

<p>"We'll talk about this later. There
are some people here...."</p>

<p>He motioned them forward and
turned away, shoo-ing everybody else
out of the room.</p>

<hr/>

<p>The news was all over Rivington,
and then all over Tanith, while the
pinnace was still coming down.
There was a crowd at the spaceport,
staring as the little craft, with its
blazon of the crowned and planet-throned
dragon, settled onto its landing
legs, and reporters of the Tanith
News Service with their screen pickups.
He met Prince Bentrik, a little
in advance of the others, and managed
to whisper to him hastily:</p>

<p>"While you're talking to anybody
here, always remember that Andray
Dunnan is working with Zaspar Makann,
and as soon as Makann consolidates
his position he's sending an
expedition against Tanith."</p>

<p>"How in blazes did you find that
out, here?" Bentrik demanded. "From
the Gilgameshers?"</p>

<p>Then Harkaman and Rathmore
and Valkanhayn and Lothar Ffayle
and the others were crowding up behind,
and more people were coming
off the pinnace, and Prince Bentrik
was trying to embrace both his wife
and his son at the same time.</p>

<p>"Prince Trask." He started at the
voice, and was looking into deep blue
eyes under coal-black hair. His
pulse gave a sudden jump, and he
said, "Valerie!" and then, "Lady Alvarath;
I'm most happy to see you
here." Then he saw who was beside
her, and squatted on his heels to
bring himself down to a convenient
size. "And Princess Myrna. Welcome
to Tanith, Your Highness!"</p>

<p>The child flung her arms around
his neck. "Oh, Prince Lucas! I'm so
glad to see you. There's been such
awful things happened!"</p>

<p>"There won't be anything awful
happen here, Princess Myrna. You
are among friends; friends with
whom you have a treaty. Remember?"</p>

<p>The child began to cry, bitterly.
"That was when I was just a play-Queen.
And now I know what they
meant when they talked about when
Grandpa and Pappa would be
through being King. Pappa didn't
even get to be King!"</p>

<p>Something big and warm and soft
was trying to push between them; a
dog with long blond hair and floppy
ears. In a year and a half, puppies
can grow surprisingly. Mopsy was
trying to lick his face. He took the
dog by the collar and straightened.</p>

<p>"Lady Valerie, will you come with
us?" he asked. "I'm going to find
quarters for Princess Myrna."</p>

<hr/>

<p>"Is it Princess Myrna, or is it
Queen Myrna?" he asked.</p>

<p>Prince Bentrik shook his head.
"We don't know. The King was
alive when we left Moonbase, but
that was five hundred hours ago. We
don't know anything about her mother,
either. She was at the Palace
when Prince Edvard was murdered;
we've heard absolutely nothing about
her. The King made a few screen
appearances, parroting things Makann
wanted him to say. Under hypnosis.
That was probably the very
least of what they did to him. They've
turned him into a zombi."</p>

<p>"Well, how did Myrna get to
Moonbase?"</p>

<p>"That was Lady Valerie, as much
as anybody else. She and Sir Thomas
Kobbly, and Captain Rainer. They
armed the servants at Cragdale with
hunting rifles and everything else
they could scrape up, captured Prince
Edvard's space-yacht, and took off in
her. Took a couple of hits from
ground batteries getting off, and
from ships around Moonbase getting
in. Ships of the Royal Mardukan
Navy!" he added furiously.</p>

<p>The pinnace in which they had
made the trip to Tanith had taken a
few hits, too, running the blockade.
Not many; her captain had thrown
her into hyperspace almost at once.</p>

<p>"They sent the yacht off to Gimli,"
Bentrik said. "From there, they'll
try to rally as many of the Royal
Navy units as haven't gone over to
Makann. They're to assemble on
Gimli and await my return. If I don't
return in fifteen hundred hours from
the time I left Moonbase, they're to
use their own judgment. I'd expect
that they'd move in on Marduk and
attack."</p>

<p>"That's sixty-odd days," Otto Harkaman
said. "That's an awfully long
time to expect that lunar base to hold
out, against a whole planet."</p>

<p>"It's a strong base. It was built four
hundred years ago, when Marduk
was fighting a combination of six
other planets. It held out against
continuous attack, once, for almost a
year. It's been constantly strengthened
ever since."</p>

<p>"And what have they to throw at
it?" Harkaman persisted.</p>

<p>"When I left, six ships of the former
Royal Navy, that had gone over
to Makann. Four fifteen-hundred-footers,
same class as the <i>Victrix</i>,
and two thousand-footers. Then,
there were four of Andray Dunnan's
ships&mdash;"</p>

<p>"You mean, he really is on Marduk?"</p>

<p>"I thought you knew that, and I
was wondering how you'd found out.
Yes: <i>Fortuna</i>, <i>Bolide</i>, and two armed
merchantmen, a Baldurbuilt ship
called the <i>Reliable</i>, and your friend
<i>Honest Horris</i>."</p>

<p>"You didn't really believe Dunnan
was on Marduk?" Boake Valkanhayn
asked.</p>

<p>"Actually, I didn't. I had to have
some kind of a story, to talk those
people out of that crusade against
Omfray of Glaspyth." He left unmentioned
Valkanhayn's own insistence
on a plundering expedition
against Xochitl. "Now that it turns
out to be true, I'm not surprised. We
decided, long ago, that Dunnan was
planning to raid Marduk. It appears
that we underestimated him. Maybe
he was reading about Hitler, too. He
wasn't planning any raid; he was
planning conquest, in the only way a
great civilization can be conquered&mdash;by
subversion."</p>

<p>"Yes," Harkaman put in. "Five
years ago, when Dunnan started this
programme, who was this Makann,
anyhow?"</p>

<p>"Nobody," Bentrik said. "A crackpot
agitator in Drepplin; he had a
coven of fellow-crackpots, who met
in the back room of a saloon and had
their office in a cigar box. The next
year, he had a suite of offices and
was buying time on a couple of telecasts.
The year after that, he had
three telecast stations of his own,
and was holding rallies and meetings
of thousands of people. And so on,
upward."</p>

<p>"Yes. Dunnan financed him, and
moved in behind him, the same way
Makann moved in behind the King.
And Dunnan will have him shot the
way he had Prince Edvard shot, and
use the murder as a pretext to liquidate
his personal followers."</p>

<p>"And then he'll own Marduk. And
we'll have the Mardukan navy coming
out of hyperspace on Tanith,"
Valkanhayn added. "So we go to Marduk
and smash him now, while he's
still little enough to smash."</p>

<p>There had been a few who had
wanted to do that about Hitler, and
a great many, later, who had regretted
that it hadn't been done.</p>

<p>"The <i>Nemesis</i>, the <i>Corisande</i>, and
the <i>Space Scourge</i> for sure?" he
asked.</p>

<p>Harkaman and Valkanhayn
agreed; Valkanhayn thought the <i>Viking's
Gift</i> of Beowulf would go
along, and Harkaman was almost
sure of the <i>Black Star</i> and <i>Queen
Flavia</i>. He turned to Bentrik.</p>

<p>"Start that pinnace off for Gimli
at once; within the hour if possible.
We don't know how many ships will
be gathered there, but we don't want
them wasted in detail-attacks. Tell
whoever's in command there that
ships from Tanith are on the way,
and to wait for them."</p>

<p>Fifteen hundred hours, less the five
hundred Bentrik was in space from
Marduk. He hadn't time to estimate
voyage-time to Gimli from the other
Mardukan trade-planets, and nobody
could estimate how many ships
would respond.</p>

<p>"It may take us a little time to get
an effective fleet together. Even after
we get through arguing about it. Argument,"
he told Bentrik, "is not exclusively
a feature of democracies."</p>

<hr/>

<p>Actually, there was very little argument,
and most of that among the
Mardukans. Prince Bentrik insisted
that Crown Princess Myrna would
have to be taken along; King Mikhyl
would be either dead or brainwashed
into imbecility by now, and
they would have to have somebody
to take the throne. Lady Valerie Alvarath,
Sir Thomas Kobbly, the tutor,
and the nurse Margot refused to
be separated from her. Prince Bentrik
was equally firm, with less success,
on leaving his wife and son on
Tanith. In the end, it was agreed
that the entire Mardukan party would
space out on the <i>Nemesis</i>.</p>

<p>The leader of the Bigglersport delegation
attempted an impassioned
tirade about going to the aid of
strangers while their own planet was
being enslaved. He was booed down
by everybody else and informed that
Tanith was being defended where a
planet ought to be, on somebody
else's real estate. When the Bigglersporters
emerged from the meeting,
they found that their own space-yacht
had been commandeered and
sent off to Amaterasu and Beowulf
for assistance, that the regiment of
local infantry they had enlisted from
the King of Tradetown had been
taken over by the Rivington authorities,
and that the Gilgamesh freighter
they had chartered to transport
them to Gram would now take them
to Marduk.</p>

<p>The problem broke into two
halves: the purely naval action that
would be fought to relieve the Moon
of Marduk, if it still held out, and to
destroy the Dunnan and Makann
ships, and the ground-fighting problem
of wiping out Makann's supporters
and restoring the Mardukan monarchy.
A great many of the people of
Marduk would be glad of a chance
to turn on Makann, once they had
arms and were properly supported.
Combat weapons were almost unknown
among the people, however,
and even sporting arms uncommon.
All the small arms and light artillery
and auto-weapons available were
gathered up.</p>

<p>The <i>Grendelsbane</i> came in from
Beowulf, and the <i>Sun Goddess</i> from
Amaterasu. Three independent Space
Viking ships were still in orbit on
Tanith; they joined the expedition.
There would be trouble with them
on Marduk; they'd want to loot. Let
the Mardukans worry about that.
They could charge it off as part of
the price for letting Zaspar Makann
get into power in the first place.</p>

<hr/>

<p>There were twelve spacecraft in
line outside the Moon of Tanith,
counting the three independents and
the forcibly chartered Gilgamesher
troop-transport; that was the biggest
fleet Space Vikings had ever assembled
in their history. Alvyn Karffard
said as much while they were checking
the formation by screen.</p>

<p>"It isn't a Space Viking fleet,"
Prince Bentrik differed. "There are
only three Space Vikings in it. The
rest are the ships of three civilized
planets. Tanith, Beowulf and Amaterasu."</p>

<p>Karffard was surprised. "You
mean <i>we're</i> civilized planets? Like
Marduk, or Baldur or Odin, or...?"</p>

<p>"Well, aren't you?"</p>

<p>Trask smiled. He'd begun to suspect
something of the sort a couple
of years ago. He hadn't really been
sure until now. His most junior staff
officer, Count Steven of Ravary, didn't
seem to appreciate the compliment.</p>

<p>"We <i>are</i> Space Vikings!" he insisted.
"And we are going to battle
with the Neobarbarians of Zaspar
Makann."</p>

<p>"Well, I won't argue the last half
of it, Steven," his father told him.</p>

<p>"Are you people done yakking
about who's civilized and who isn't?"
Guatt Kirbey asked. "Then give the
signal. All the other ships are ready
to jump."</p>

<p>Trask pressed the button on the
desk in front of him. A light went on
over Kirbey's control panel as one
would on each of the other ships. He
said, "Jumping," around the stem of
his pipe, and twisted the red handle
and shoved it in.</p>

<hr/>

<p>Four hundred and fifty hours, in
the private universe that was the
<i>Nemesis</i>; outside, nothing else existed,


and inside there was nothing
to do but wait, as each hour carried
them six trillion miles nearer to Gimli.
At first, the ruthless and terrible
Space Viking, Steven, Count of Ravary,
was wildly excited, but before
long he found that there was nothing
exciting going on; it was just a
spaceship, and he'd been on ships
before. Her Highness the Crown
Princess, or maybe her Majesty the
Queen of Marduk, stopped being excited
about the same time, and she
and Steven and Mopsy played together.
Of course, Myrna was only a
girl, and two years younger than
Steven, but she was, or at least might
be, his sovereign, and beside, she had
been in a space action, if you call
what lies between a planet and its
satellite space and if you call being
shot at without being able to shoot
back an action, and Relentless Ravary,
the Interstellar Terror, had not.
This rather made up for being a girl
and a mere baby of going-on-ten.</p>

<p>One thing, there were no lessons.
Sir Thomas Kobbly fancied himself
as a landscape-painter and spent most
of his time arguing techniques with
Vann Larch, and Steven's tutor, Captain
Rainer was a normal-space astrogator
and found a kindred spirit
in Sharll Renner. This left Lady Valerie
Alvarath at a loose end. There
were plenty of volunteers to help her
fill in the time, but Rank Hath Its
Privileges; Trask undertook to see to
it that she did not suffer excessively
from shipboard ennui.</p>

<p>Sharll Renner and Captain Rainer
approached him, during the cocktail
hour before dinner, some hundred
hours short of emergence.</p>

<p>"We think we've figured out where
Dunnan's base is," Renner said.</p>

<p>"Oh, good!" Everybody else had, on
a different planet. "Where's yours?"</p>

<p>"Abaddon," the Count of Ravary's
tutor said. When he saw that the
name meant nothing to Trask, he
added, "The ninth, outer, planet of
the Marduk system." He said it disgustedly.</p>

<p>"Yes; remember how you had
Boake and Manfred out with their
ships, checking our outside planets
to see if Prince Viktor might be hiding
on one of them? Well, what
with the time element, and the way
the <i>Honest Horris</i> was shuttling
back and forth from Marduk to
some place that wasn't Gimli, and
the way Dunnan was able to bring
his ships in as soon as the shooting
started on Marduk, we thought he
must be on an uninhabited outer
planet of the Marduk system."</p>

<p>"I don't know why we never
thought of that, ourselves," Rainer
put in. "I suppose because nobody
ever thinks of Abaddon for any reason.
It's only a small planet, about
four thousand miles in diameter, and
it's three and a half billion miles
from primary. It's frozen solid. It
would take almost a year to get to it
on Abbot drive, and if your ship has
Dillinghams, why not take a little
longer and go to a good planet? So
nobody bothered with Abaddon."</p>

<p>But for Dunnan's purpose, it
would be perfect. He called Prince
Bentrik and Alvyn Karffard to him;
they found the idea instantly convincing.
They talked about it through
dinner, and held a general discussion
afterward. Even Guatt Kirbey, the
ship's pessimist, could find no objection
to it. Trask and Bentrik began
at once making battle plans. Karffard
wondered if they hadn't better wait
till they got to Gimli and discuss it
with the others.</p>

<p>"No," Trask told him. "This is the
flagship; here's where the strategy is
decided."</p>

<p>"Well, how about the Mardukan
Navy?" Captain Rainer asked. "I
think Fleet Admiral Bargham's in
command at Gimli."</p>

<p>Prince Simon Bentrik was silent
for a moment, as though he realized,
with reluctance, that the big decision
was no longer avoidable.</p>

<p>"He may be, at present, but he
won't be when I get there. I will be."</p>

<p>"But ... Your Highness, he's a
fleet admiral; you're just a commodore."</p>

<p>"I am not just a commodore. The
King is a prisoner, and for all we
know dead. The Crown Prince is
dead. The Princess Myrna is a child.
I am assuming the position of Regent
and Prince-Protector of the Realm."</p>




<!--se:split--><h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXVI</h2>


<p>There was a little difficulty on
Gimli with Fleet Admiral Bargham.
Commodores didn't give orders to
fleet admirals. Well, maybe regents
did, but who gave Prince Bentrik
authority to call himself regent? Regents
were elected by the Chamber
of Delegates, on nomination of the
Chancellor.</p>

<p>"That's Zaspar Makann and his
stooges you're talking about?" Bentrik
laughed.</p>

<p>"Well, the Constitution...." He
thought better of that, before somebody
asked him what Constitution.
"Well, a Regent has to be chosen by
election. Even members of the Royal
Family can't just make themselves
Regent by saying they are."</p>

<p>"I can. I just have. And I don't
think there are going to be many
more elections, at least for the present.
Not till we make sure the people
of Marduk can be trusted with the
control of the government."</p>

<p>"Well, the pinnace from Moonbase
reported that there were six
Royal navy battleships and four other
craft attacking them," Bargham
objected. "I only have four ships
here; I sent for the ones on the other
trade-planets, but I haven't heard
from any of them. We can't go there
with only four ships."</p>

<p>"Sixteen ships," Bentrik corrected.
"No, fifteen and one Gilgamesher
we're using for a troopship. I think
that's enough. You'll remain here on
Gimli, in any case, admiral; as soon
as the other ships come in, you'll
follow to Marduk with them. I am
now holding a meeting aboard the
Tanith flagship <i>Nemesis</i>. I want your
four ship-commanders aboard immediately.
I am not including you
because you're remaining here to
bring up the late comers and as soon
as this meeting is over we are spacing
out."</p>

<p>Actually, they spaced out sooner;
the meeting lasted the whole three
hundred and fifty hours to Abaddon.
A ship's captain, if he has a good
exec, as all of them had, needs only
sit at his command-desk and look
important while the ship is going
into and emerging from a long jump;
the rest of the time he can study ancient
history or whatever his shipboard
hobby is. Rather than waste
three hundred and fifty hours of
precious time, each captain turned
his ship over to his exec and remained
aboard the <i>Nemesis</i>; even on
so spacious a craft the officers' country
north of the engine rooms was
crowded like a tourist hotel in mid-season.
One of the four Mardukans
was the Captain Garravay who had
smuggled Bentrik's wife and son off
Marduk, and the other three were
just as pro-Bentrik, pro-Tanith, and
anti-Makann. They were, on general
principles, also anti-Bargham. There
must be something wrong with any
fleet admiral who remained in his
command after Zaspar Makann came
to power.</p>

<p>So, as soon as they spaced out,
there was a party. After that, they
settled down to planning the Battle
of Abaddon.</p>

<hr/>

<p>There was no Battle of Abaddon.</p>

<p>It was a dead planet, one side in
night and the other in dim twilight
from the little speck of a sun three
and a half billion miles away, jagged
mountains rising out of the snow
that covered it from pole to pole.
The snow on top would be frozen
CO<sub>2</sub>; according to the thermocouples,
the surface temperature was
well below minus-100 Centigrade.
No ships on orbit circled it; there
was a little faint radiation, which
could have been from naturally radioactive
minerals; there was no electrical
discharge detectable.</p>

<p>There was considerable bad language
in the command room of the
<i>Nemesis</i>. The captains of the other
ships were screening in, wanting to
know what to do.</p>

<p>"Go on in," Trask told them. "Englobe
the planet, and go down to
within a mile if necessary. They
could be hiding somewhere on it."</p>

<p>"Well, they're not hiding at the
bottom of any ocean, that's for sure,"
somebody said. It was one of those
feeble jokes at which everybody
laughs because nothing else is laughable
about the situation.</p>

<p>Finally, they found it, at the north
pole, which was no colder than anywhere
else on the planet. First radiation
leakage, the sort that would
come from a closed-down nuclear
power plant. Then a modicum of electrical
discharge. Finally the telescopic
screens picked up the spaceport, a
huge oval amphitheater excavated
out of a valley between two jagged
mountain ranges.</p>

<p>The language in the command
room was just as bad, but the tone
had changed. It was surprising what
a wide range of emotions could be
expressed by a few simple blasphemies
and obscenities. Everybody who
had been deriding Sharll Renner
were now acclaiming him.</p>

<p>But it was lifeless. The ships came
crowding in; air-locked landing-craft
full of space-armored ground-fighters
went down. Screens in the
command room lit as they transmitted
in views. Depressions in the carbon-dioxide
snow where the hundred-foot
pad-feet of ships' landing-legs
had pressed down. Ranks of
cargo-lighters that had plied to and
from other ships or orbit. And, all
around the cliff-walled perimeter,
air-locked doors to caverns and tunnels.
A great many men, with a great
deal of equipment, had been working
here in the estimated five or six
years since Andray Dunnan&mdash;or
somebody&mdash;had constructed this base.</p>

<p>Andray Dunnan. They found his
badge, the crescent, blue on black,
on things. They found equipment
that Harkaman recognized as having
been part of the original cargo stolen
with the <i>Enterprise</i>. They even
found, in his living quarters, a blown-up
photoprint picture of Nevil
Ormm, draped in black. But what
they did not find was a single vehicle
small enough to be taken aboard a
ship, or a single scrap of combat
equipment, not even a pistol or a
hand grenade.</p>

<p>Dunnan had gone, but they knew
whither, and where to find him. The
conquest of Marduk had moved into
its final phase.</p>

<hr/>

<p>Marduk was on the other side of
the sun from Abaddon with ninety-five
million miles&mdash;close, but not
inconveniently so, Trask thought&mdash;to
spare. Guatt Kirbey and the Mardukan
astrogator who was helping
him made it within a light-minute.
The Mardukan thought that was fine;
Kirbey didn't. The last microjump
was aimed at the Moon of Marduk,
which was plainly visible in the telescopic
screen. They came out within
a light-second and a half, which Kirbey
admitted was reasonably close.
As soon as the screens cleared, they
saw that they weren't too late. The
Moon of Marduk was under fire and
firing back.</p>

<p>They'd have detection, and he
knew what they were detecting&mdash;a
clump of sixteen rending distortions
of the fabric of space-time, as sixteen
ships came into sudden existence
in the normal continuum. Beside
him, Bentrik had a screen on;
it was still milky-white, and he was
speaking into a radio hand-phone.</p>

<p>"Simon Bentrik, Prince-Protector
of Marduk, calling Moonbase." Then,
slowly, he repeated his screen-combination
twice. "Come in, Moonbase;
this is Simon Bentrik, Prince-Protector,
speaking."</p>

<p>He waited ten seconds, and was
about to start again, when the screen
flickered. The man who appeared in
it wore the insignia of a Mardukan
navy commodore. He needed a shave,
but he was grinning happily. Bentrik
greeted him by name.</p>

<p>"Hello, Simon; glad to see you.
Your Highness, I mean; what is this
Prince-Protector thing?"</p>

<p>"Somebody had to do it. Is the
King still alive?"</p>

<p>The grin slid off the commodore's
face, starting with his eyes.</p>

<p>"We don't know. At first, Makann
had him speaking by screen&mdash;you
know what it was like&mdash;urging everybody
to obey and co-operate with
'our trusted Chancellor.' Makann always
appeared on the screen with
him."</p>

<p>Bentrik nodded. "I remember."</p>

<p>"Before you left, Makann kept
quiet, and let the King make the
speech. After a while, the King wasn't
able to speak coherently; he'd
stammer, and repeat. So then Makann
did all the talking; they couldn't
even depend on him to parrot
what they were giving him with an
earplug phone. Then he stopped appearing
entirely. I suppose there
were physical symptoms they couldn't
allow to be seen." Bentrik was
cursing horribly under his breath;
the officer at Moonbase nodded. "I
hope for his sake that he is dead."</p>

<p>Poor Goodman Mikhyl. Bentrik
was saying, "So do I." Trask agreed,
mentally. The commodore at Moonbase
was still talking:</p>

<p>"We got two more renegade
RMN ships, within a hundred hours
after you left." He named them.
"And we got one of the Dunnan
ships, the <i>Fortuna</i>. We blew out the
Malverton Navy Yard. They're still
using the Antarctic Naval Base, but
we've knocked out a good deal of
that. We got the <i>Honest Horris</i>.
They made two attempts to land on
us and lost a couple of ships. Eight
hundred hours ago, they were joined
by the rest of Dunnan's fleet, five
ships. They made a landing on Malverton
while it was turned away
from us. Makann announced that
they were RMN units from the
trade-planets that had joined him. I
suppose the planet-side public swallowed
that. He also announced that
their commander, Admiral Dunnan,
was in command of the People's
Armed Forces."</p>

<p>Dunnan's ground-fighters would
be in control of Malverton. By now,
the odds were that Makann was as
much his prisoner as King Mikhyl
VIII had been Makann's.</p>

<p>"So Dunnan has conquered Marduk.
All he has to do, now, is make
it stick," he said. "I see four ships off
Moonbase; how many more have
they?"</p>

<p>"These are <i>Bolide</i> and <i>Eclipse</i>,
Dunnan's ships, and former Royal
Mardukan Navy ships <i>Champion</i> and
<i>Guardian</i>. There are five orbiting off
the planet: Ex-RMNS <i>Paladin</i>, and
Dunnan ships <i>Starhopper</i>, <i>Banshee</i>,
<i>Reliable</i> and <i>Exporter</i>. The last two
are listed as merchantmen, but
they're performing like regulation
battlecraft."</p>

<p>The four that had been circling
Moonbase broke orbit and started
toward the relieving fleet; one took
a hit from a Moonbase missile, which
staggered her but did no evident
damage. Two ships which had been
orbiting the planet also changed
course and started out. The command
room was silent except for a subdued
chuckling from a computer
which was estimating enemy intentions
by observed data and Games
Theory. Three more came hurrying
out from the planet, and the two in
the lead slowed to let them catch
up. He wanted to be able to engage
the four from off the satellite before
the five from the planet joined them,
but Karffard's computers said it
couldn't be done.</p>

<p>"All right, we have to take all our
bad eggs in one basket," he said.
"Try to hit them as soon after they
join as possible."</p>

<hr/>

<p>The computers began chuckling
again. The serving-robots were doing
a rush business in hot coffee.
Prince Bentrik's son, sitting beside
his father, had stopped being Ruthless
Ravary the Demon of the Spaceways
and was a very young officer
going into his first space battle, more
scared and at the same time happier
than he had ever been in his short
life. Captain Garravay of the <i>Vindex</i>
was making signal to the other ships
from Gimli: "<i>Royal Navy; smash the
traitors first!</i>" He could understand
and sympathize, even if he couldn't
approve of putting personal ahead of
tactical considerations, and made a
quick sealed-beam call to Harkaman
to be prepared to plug any holes they
left in formation if they broke away
in search of vengeance. He also ordered
the <i>Black Star</i> and the <i>Sun
Goddess</i> to shepherd the lightly
armed and troop-crammed Gilgamesh
freighter out of danger. The
two clumps of Dunnan-Makann
ships were converging rapidly, and
Alvyn Karffard was screaming into
a phone to somebody to get more
speed.</p>

<p>At a thousand miles, the missiles
started going out, and the two groups
of ships, four and five, were equidistant
from each other and from the
allied fleet, at the points of a triangle
that was growing smaller by the
second. The first fire-globes of intercepted
missiles spread from their
seeds of brief white light. A red light
flashed on the damage-board. An
enemy ship took a hit. The captain
of the <i>Queen Flavia</i> was on a screen,
saying that his ship was heavily damaged.
Three ships bearing the Mardukan
dragon-and-planet circled
madly around each other at what
looked, in the screen, like just over
pistol-range, two of them firing into
the third, which was replying desperately.
The third one blew up, and
somebody was yelling out of a
screenspeaker, "Scratch one traitor!"</p>

<p>Another ship blew up somewhere,
and then another. He heard somebody
say, "There went one of ours,"
and wondered which one it was. Not
the <i>Corisande</i>, he hoped; no, it wasn't,
he could see her rushing after
two other ships which were, in turn,
speeding toward the <i>Black Star</i>, the
<i>Sun Goddess</i> and the Gilgamesh
freighter. Then the <i>Nemesis</i> and the
<i>Starhopper</i> were within gun-range,
pounding each other savagely.</p>

<p>The battle had tied itself into a
ball of gyrating, fire-spitting ships
that went rolling toward the planet,
which was swinging in and out of
the main viewscreen and growing
rapidly larger. By the time they were
down to the inner edge of the exosphere,
the ball had started to unwind,
ship after ship dropping out of it
and going into orbit, some badly
damaged and some going to attack
damaged enemies. Some of them
were completely around the planet,
hidden by it. He saw three ships approaching
<i>Corisande</i>, <i>Sun Goddess</i>,
and the Gilgamesher. He got Harkaman
on the screen.</p>

<p>"Where's the <i>Black Star</i>?" he
asked.</p>

<p>"Gone to Em-See-Square," Harkaman
replied. "We got the two Dunnan-Makanns.
<i>Bolide</i> and <i>Reliable</i>."</p>

<p>Then young Steven of Ravary,
who had been monitoring one of the
intership screens, had a call from
Captain Gompertz of the <i>Grendelsbane</i>,
and at the same moment somebody
else was yelling, "Here comes
the <i>Starhopper</i> again!"</p>

<p>"Tell him to wait a moment; we
have troubles," he said.</p>

<p><i>Nemesis</i> and <i>Starhopper</i> sledge-hammered
each other and parried
with counter-missiles, and then, quite
unexpectedly, the <i>Starhopper</i> went
to Em-See-Square.</p>

<p>There was an awful lot of Em
being converted to Ee off Marduk,
today. Including Manfred Ravallo;
that grieved him. Manfred was a
good man, and a good friend. He had
a girl in Rivington.... Nifflheim,
there were eight hundred good men
aboard the <i>Black Star</i>, and most of
them had girls who'd wait in vain
for them on Tanith. Well, what had
Otto Harkaman said, so long ago, on
Gram? Something about old age not
being a usual cause of death among
Space Vikings, wasn't it?</p>

<p>Then he remembered that Gompertz
of the <i>Grendelsbane</i> was trying
to get him. He told young Count
Steven to switch him over.</p>

<p>"We just lost one of our Mardukans,"
Gompertz told him, in his
staccato Beowulf accent. "I think she
was the <i>Challenger</i>. The ship that
got her looks like the <i>Banshee</i>; I'm
turning to engage her."</p>

<p>"Which way; west around the
planet? Be right with you, captain."</p>




<!--se:split--><h2 epub:type="title z3998:roman">XXVII</h2>


<p>It was like finishing a word puzzle.
You sit staring at it, looking for more
spaces to print letters into, and suddenly
you realize that there are no
more, that the puzzle is done. That
was how the space-battle of Marduk,
the Battle <i>off</i> Marduk, ended. Suddenly
there were no more colored
fire-globes opening and fading, no
more missiles coming, no more enemy
ships to throw missiles at. Now
it was time to take a count of his
own ships, and then begin thinking
about the Battle <i>on</i> Marduk.</p>

<p>The <i>Black Star</i> was gone. So was
RMNS <i>Challenger</i>, and RMNS <i>Conquistador</i>.
<i>Space Scourge</i> was badly
hammered; worse than after the
Beowulf raid, Boake Valkanhayn said.
The <i>Viking's Gift</i> was heavily damaged,
too, and so was the <i>Corisande</i>,
and so, from the looks of the damage
board, was the <i>Nemesis</i>. And
three ships were missing&mdash;the three
independent Space Vikings, <i>Harpy</i>,
<i>Curse of Cagn</i>, and Roger-fan-Morvill
Esthersan's <i>Damnthing</i>.</p>

<p>Prince Bentrik frowned over that.
"I can't think that all three of those
ships would have been destroyed,
without anybody seeing it happen."</p>

<p>"Neither can I. But I can think
that all those ships broke out of the
battle together and headed in for the
planet. They didn't come here to
help liberate Marduk, they came here
to fill their cargo holds. I only hope
the people they're robbing all voted
the Makann ticket in the last election."
A crumb of comfort occurred
to him, and he passed it on. "The only
people who are armed to resist
them will be Makann's storm-troops
and Dunnan's pirates; they'll be the
ones to get killed."</p>

<p>"We don't want any more killing
than...." Prince Simon broke off
suddenly. "I'm beginning to talk like
his late Highness Crown Prince Edvard,"
he said. "He didn't want bloodshed,
either, and look whose blood
was shed. If they're doing what you
think they are, I'm afraid we'll have
to kill a few of your Space Vikings,
too."</p>

<p>"They aren't my Space Vikings."
He was a little surprised to find that,
after almost eight years of bearing
the name himself, he was using it as
an other-people label. Well, why
not? He was the ruler of the civilized
planet of Tanith, wasn't he? "But
let's not start fighting them till the
main war's over. Those three shiploads
are no worse than a bad cold;
Makann and Dunnan are the plague."</p>

<p>It would still take four hours to
get down, in a spiral of deceleration.
They started the telecasts which had
been filmed and taped on the voyage
from Gimli. The Prince-Protector
Simon Bentrik spoke: The illegal
rule of the traitor Makann was ended.
His deluded followers were advised
to return to their allegiance to the
Crown. The People's Watchmen
were ordered to surrender their arms
and disband; in localities where they
refused, the loyal people were called
upon to co-operate with the legitimate
armed forces of the Crown in
exterminating them, and would be
furnished arms as soon as possible.</p>

<p>Little Princess Myrna spoke: "If
my grandfather is still alive, he is
your King; if he is not, I am your
Queen, and until I am old enough to
rule in my own right, I accept Prince
Simon as Regent and Protector of
the Realm, and I call on all of you
to obey him as I will."</p>

<p>"You didn't say anything about
representative government, or democracy,
or the constitution," Trask
mentioned. "And I noticed the use
of the word 'rule,' instead of 'reign.'"</p>

<p>"That's right," the self-proclaimed
Prince-Protector said. "There's something
wrong with democracy. If
there weren't, it couldn't be overthrown
by people like Makann, attacking
it from within by democratic
procedures. I don't think it's fundamentally
unworkable. I think it just
has a few of what engineers call
bugs. It's not safe to run a defective
machine till you learn the defects
and remedy them."</p>

<p>"Well, I hope you don't think our
Sword-World feudalism doesn't have
bugs." He gave examples, and then
quoted Otto Harkaman about barbarism
spreading downward from
the top instead of upward from the
bottom.</p>

<p>"It may just be," he added, "that
there is something fundamentally
unworkable about government itself.
As long as <i>Homo sapiens terra</i> is a
wild animal, which he has always
been and always will be until he
evolves into something different in
a million or so years, maybe a workable
system of government is a political
science impossibility, just as
transmutation of elements was a
physical-science impossibility as
long as they tried to do it by chemical
means."</p>

<p>"Then we'll just have to make it
work the best way we can, and when
it breaks down, hope the next try
will work a little better, for a little
longer," Bentrik said.</p>

<hr/>

<p>Malverton grew in the telescopic
screens as they came down. The
Navy Spaceport, where Trask had
landed almost two years before, was
in wreckage, sprinkled with damaged
ships that had been blasted on
the ground, and slagged by thermonuclear
fires. There was fighting in
the air all over the city proper, on
building-tops, on the ground, and in
the air. That would be the <i>Damnthing</i>-<i>Harpy</i>-<i>Curse
of Cagn</i> Space
Vikings. The Royal Palace was the
center of one of half a dozen swirls
of battle that had condensed out of
the general skirmishing.</p>

<p>Paytrik Morland started for it
with the first wave of ground-fighters
from the <i>Nemesis</i>. The Gilgamesh
freighter, like most of her ilk, had
huge cargo ports all around; these
began opening and disgorging a
swarm of everything from landing-craft
and hundred-foot airboats to
one man air-cavalry single-mounts.
The top landing-stages and terraces
of the palace were almost obscured
by the flashes of auto-cannon shells
and the smoke and dust of projectiles.
Then the first vehicles landed,
the firing from the air stopped, and
men fanned out as skirmishers, occasionally
firing with small arms.</p>

<p>Trask and Bentrik were in the
armory off the vehicle-bay, putting
on combat equipment, when the
twelve-year-old Count of Ravary
joined them and began rummaging
for weapons and a helmet.</p>

<p>"You're not going," his father told
him. "I'll have enough to worry about
taking care of myself...."</p>

<p>That was the wrong approach.
Trask interrupted:</p>

<p>"You're to stay aboard, Count," he
said. "As soon as things stabilize,
Princess Myrna will have to come
down. You'll act as her personal escort.
And don't think you're being
shoved into the background. She's
Crown Princess, and if she isn't
Queen now, she will be in a few
years. Escorting her now will be the
foundation of your naval career.
There isn't a young officer in the
Royal Navy who wouldn't trade
places with you."</p>

<p>"That was the right way to handle
him, Lucas," Bentrik approved, after
the boy had gone away, proud of his
opportunity and his responsibility.</p>

<p>"It'll do just what I said for him."
He stopped for a moment, to play
with an idea that had just struck him.
"You know, the girl will be Queen
in a few years, if she isn't now.
Queens need Prince Consorts. Your
son's a good boy; I liked him the
first moment I saw him, and I've
liked him better ever since. He'd be
a good man on the throne beside
Queen Myrna."</p>

<p>"Oh, that's out of the question.
Not the matter of consanguinity,
they're about a sixteenth cousin.
But people would say I was abusing
the Protectorship to marry my son
onto the Throne."</p>

<p>"Simon, speaking as one sovereign
prince to another, you have a lot to
learn. You've learned one important
lesson already, that a ruler must
be willing to use force and shed
blood to enforce his rule. You have
to learn, too, that a ruler cannot afford
to be guided by his fears of what
people will say about him. Not even
what history will say about him. A
ruler's only judge is himself."</p>

<p>Bentrik slid the transpex visor of
his helmet up and down experimentally,
checked the chambers of his
pistol and carbine.</p>

<p>"All that matters to me is the
peace and well-being of Marduk. I'll
have to talk it over with ... with
my only judge. Well, let's go."</p>



<p>The top terraces were secure when
their car landed. More vehicles were
coming down and discharging men;
a swarm of landing craft were sinking
past the building toward the
ground two thousand feet below.
Auto-weapons and small arms and
light cannon banged, and bombs and
recoilless-rifle shells crashed, on the
lower terraces. They put the car
down one of the shaftways until they
ran into heavy fire from below, at
the limit of the advance, and then
turned into a broad hallway, floating
high enough to clear the heads of the
men on foot. It looked like the part
of the Palace where he had lodged
when he had been a guest there but
it probably wasn't.</p>

<p>They came to hastily constructed
barricades of furniture and statuary
and furnishings, behind which Makann's
People's Watchmen and Andray
Dunnan's Space Vikings were
making resistance. They entered
rooms dusty with powdered plaster
and acrid with powder fumes, littered
with corpses. They passed lifter-skids
being towed out with wounded.
They went through rooms crowded
with their own men&mdash;"<i>Keep your
fingers off things; this isn't a looting
expedition!</i>" "<i>You stupid cretin, how
did you know there wasn't a man
hiding behind that?</i>" In one huge
room, ballroom or concert room or
something, there were prisoners
herded, and men from the <i>Nemesis</i>
were setting up polyencephalographic
veridicators, sturdy chairs with
wires and adjustable helmets and
translucent globes mounted over
them. A couple of Morland's men
were hustling a People's Watchman
to one and strapping him into a
chair.</p>

<p>"You know what this is, don't
you?" one of them was saying. "This
is a veridicator. That globe'll light
blue; the moment you try to lie to us,
it'll turn red. And the moment it
turns red, I'm going to hammer your
teeth down your throat with the butt
of this pistol."</p>

<p>"Have you found anything out
about the King, yet?" Bentrik asked
him.</p>

<p>He turned. "No. Nobody we've
questioned so far knows anything
later than a month ago about him.
He just disappeared." He was going
to say something else, saw Bentrik's
face, and changed his mind.</p>

<p>"He's dead," Bentrik said dully.
"They tortured him and brainwashed
him and used him as a ventriloquist's
dummy on the screen as long as they

could; when they couldn't let the
people see him any more, they
stuffed him into a converter."</p>

<p>They did find Zaspar Makann,
hours later. Maybe he could have told
them something, if he had been
alive, but he and a few of his fanatical
followers had barricaded themselves
in the Throne room and died
trying to defend it. They found Makann
on the Throne, the top of his
head blown away, a pistol death-gripped
in his hand, and the Great
Crown lying on the floor, the velvet
inner cap bullet-pierced and splattered
with blood and brain tissue.
Prince Bentrik picked it up and
looked at it disgustedly.</p>

<p>"We'll have to have something
done about that," he said. "I really
didn't think he'd do just this. I
thought he wanted to abolish the
Throne, not sit on it."</p>

<p>Except for one chandelier smashed
and several corpses that had to be
dragged out, the Ministerial Council
room was intact. They set up headquarters
there. Boake Valkanhayn
and several other ship-captains
joined them. There was fighting going
on in several places inside the
Palace, and the city was still in a
turmoil. Somebody managed to get
in touch with the captains of the
<i>Damnthing</i>, the <i>Harpy</i> and the <i>Curse
of Cagn</i> and bring them to the
Palace. Trask attempted to reason
with them, to no avail.</p>

<p>"Prince Trask, you're my friend,
and you've always dealt fairly with
me," Roger-fan-Morvill Esthersan
said. "But you know just how far any
Space Viking captain can control his
crew. These men didn't come here to
correct the political mistakes of Marduk.
They came here for what they
could haul away. I could get myself
killed trying to stop them now...."</p>

<p>"I wouldn't even try," the captain
of the <i>Curse of Cagn</i> put in. "I came
here for what I could make out of
this planet, myself."</p>

<p>"You can try to stop them," said
the captain of the <i>Harpy</i>. "You'll find
it even harder than what you're doing
now."</p>

<p>Trask looked at some of the reports
that had come in from elsewhere
on the planet. Harkaman had
landed on one of the big cities to
the east, and the people had risen
against Makann's local bosses and
were helping wipe out the People's
Watchmen with arms they had been
furnished. Valkanhayn's exec had
landed on a large concentration camp
where close to ten thousand of Makann's
political enemies had been
penned; he had distributed all his
available weapons and was calling
for more. Gompertz of the <i>Grendelsbane</i>
was at Drepplin; he reported
just the reverse. The people there
had risen in support of the Makann
regime, and he wanted authorization
to use nuclear weapons against them.</p>

<p>"Could you talk your people into
going to some other city?" Trask
asked. "We have a city for you; big
industrial center. It ought to be fine
looting. Drepplin."</p>

<p>"The people there are Mardukan
subjects, too," Bentrik began. Then
he shrugged. "It's not what we'd like
to do, it's what we have to. By all
means, gentlemen. Take your men to
Drepplin, and nobody will object to
anything you do."</p>

<p>"And when you have that place
looted out, try Abaddon. You were
aground there, Captain Esthersan.
You know what all Dunnan left
there."</p>

<hr/>

<p>A couple of Space Vikings&mdash;no,
Royal Army of Tanith men&mdash;brought
in the old woman, dirty, in rags, almost
exhausted.</p>

<p>"She wants to talk to Prince Bentrik;
won't talk to anybody else. Says
she knows where the King is."</p>

<p>Bentrik rose quickly, brought her
to a chair, poured a glass of wine for
her.</p>

<p>"He's still alive, Your Highness.
The Crown Princess Melanie and I ... I'm
sorry, Your Highness;
Dowager Crown Princess ... have
been taking care of him, the best way
we could. If you'll only come quickly...."</p>

<p>Mikhyl VIII, Planetary King of
Marduk, lay on a pallet of filthy bedding
on the floor of a narrow room
behind a mass-energy converter
which disposed of the rubbish and
sewage and generated power for
some of the fixed equipment on one
of the middle floors of the east wing
of the palace. There was a bucket of
water, and on a rough wooden bench
lay a cloth-wrapped bundle of food.
A woman, haggard and disheveled,
wearing a suit of greasy mechanic's
coveralls and nothing else, squatted
beside him. The Crown Princess
Melanie, whom Trask remembered
as the charming and gracious hostess
of Cragdale. She tried to rise, and
staggered.</p>

<p>"Prince Bentrik! And it's Prince
Trask of Tanith!" she cried. "Just
hurry; get him out of here and to
where he can be taken care of.
Please." Then she sat down again on
the floor and fell over, unconscious.</p>

<hr/>

<p>They couldn't get the story. The
Princess Melanie had collapsed completely.
Her companion, another noblewoman
of the court, could only
ramble disconnectedly. And the
King merely lay, bathed and fed in
a clean bed, and looked up at them
wonderingly, as though nothing he
saw or heard conveyed any meaning
to him. The doctors could do nothing.</p>

<p>"He has no mind, no more mind
than a new-born baby. We can keep
him alive, I don't know how long.
That's our professional duty. But
it's no kindness to His Majesty."</p>


<p>The little pockets of resistance in
the Palace were wiped out, through
the next morning and afternoon. All
but one, far underground, below the
main power plant. They tried sleep-gas;
the defenders had blowers and
sent it back at them. They tried
blasting; there was a limit to what
the fabric of the building would
stand. And nobody knew how long
it would take to starve them out.</p>

<p>On the third day, a man crawled
out, pushing a white shirt tied to the
barrel of a carbine ahead of him.</p>

<p>"Is Prince Lucas Trask of Tanith
here?" he asked. "I won't speak to
anybody else."</p>

<p>They brought Trask quickly. All
that was visible of the other man was
the carbine-barrel and the white
shirt. When Trask called to him, he
raised his head above the rubble behind
which he was hiding.</p>

<p>"Prince Trask, we have Andray
Dunnan here; he was leading us, but
now we've disarmed him and are
holding him. If we turn him over to
you, will you let us go?"</p>

<p>"If you all come out unarmed, and
bring Dunnan with you, I promise
you, the rest of you will be let outside
this building and allowed to go
away unharmed."</p>

<p>"All right. We'll be coming out in
a minute." The man raised his voice.
"It's agreed!" he called. "Bring him
out."</p>

<p>There were fewer than two score
of them. Some wore the uniforms
of high officers of the People's Watchmen
or of People's Welfare Party
functionaries; a few wore the heavily
braided short jackets of Space
Viking officers. Among them, they
propelled a thin-faced man with a
pointed beard, and Trask had to look
twice at him before he recognized
the face of Andray Dunnan. It
looked more like the face of Duke
Angus of Wardshaven as he last remembered
it. Dunnan looked at him
in incurious contempt.</p>

<p>"Your dotard king couldn't rule
without Zaspar Makann, and Makann
couldn't rule without me, and
neither can you," he said. "Shoot this
gang of turncoats, and I'll rule Marduk
for you." He looked at Trask
again. "Who are you?" he demanded.
"I don't know you."</p>

<p>Trask slipped the pistol from his
holster, thumbing off the safety.</p>

<p>"I am Lucas Trask. You've heard
that name before," he said. "Stand
away from behind him, you people."</p>

<p>"Oh, yes; the poor fool who
thought he was going to marry Elaine
Karvall. Well, you won't, Lord Trask
of Traskon. She loves me, not you.
She's waiting for me now, on Gram...."</p>

<p>Trask shot him through the head.
Dunnan's eyes widened in momentary
incredulity; then his knees gave
way, and he fell forward on his face.
Trask thumbed on the safety and
holstered the pistol, and looked at
the body on the concrete.</p>

<p>It hadn't made the least difference.
It had been like shooting a
snake, or one of the nasty scorpion-things
that infested the old buildings
in Rivington. Just no more Andray
Dunnan.</p>

<p>"Take that carrion and stuff it in a
mass-energy converter," he said.
"And I don't want anybody to mention
the name of Andray Dunnan to
me again."</p>

<p>He didn't look at them haul Dunnan's
body away on a lifter-skid; he
watched the fifty-odd leaders of the
overthrown misgovernment of Marduk
shamble away to freedom,
guarded by Paytrik Morland's riflemen.
Now there was something to
reproach himself for; he'd committed
a separate and distinct crime
against Marduk by letting each one
of them live. Unless recognized and
killed by somebody outside, every
one of them would be at some villainy
before next sunrise. Well, King
Simon I could cope with that.</p>

<p>He started when he realized how
he had thought of his friend. Well,
why not? Mikhyl's mind was dead;
his body would not survive it more
than a year. Then a child Queen, and
a long regency, and long regencies
were dangerous. Better a strong
King, in name as well as power. And
the succession could be safeguarded
by marrying Steven and Myrna.
Myrna had accepted, at eight, that
she must some day marry for reasons
of state; why not her playmate Steven?</p>

<p>And Simon Bentrik would see the
necessity. He was neither a fool nor
a moral coward; he only needed to
take some time to adjust to ideas.
The rabble who had bought their
lives with their leader's had gone,
now. Slowly, he followed them, thinking.</p>

<p>Don't press the idea on Simon too
hard; just expose him to it and let
him adopt it. And there would be the
treaty&mdash;Tanith, Marduk, Beowulf,
Amaterasu; eventually, treaties with
the other civilized planets. Nebulously,
the idea of a League of Civilized
Worlds began to take shape in his
mind.</p>

<p>Be a good idea if he adopted the
title of King of Tanith for himself.
And cut loose from the Sword-Worlds;
especially cut loose from
Gram. Let Viktor of Xochitl have it.
Or Garvan Spasso. Viktor wouldn't
be the last Space Viking to take his
ships back against the Sword-Worlds.
Sooner or later, civilization
in the Old Federation would drive
them all home to loot the planets
that had sent them out.</p>

<p>Well, if he was going to be a king,
shouldn't he have a queen? Kings
usually did. He climbed into the little
hall-car and started up a long
shaft. There was Valerie Alvarath.
They'd enjoyed each other's society
on the <i>Nemesis</i>. He wondered if she
would want to make it permanent,
even on a throne....</p>

<p>Elaine was with him. He felt her
beside him, almost tangibly. Her
voice was whispering to him: <i>She
loves you, Lucas. She'll say yes. Be
good to her, and she'll make you
happy.</i> Then she was gone, and he
knew that she would never return.</p>

<p>Good-by, Elaine.</p>



